# Week 27 February - 5 March 2023

- **EDPB issues a mild critique of the US adequacy mechanism** (https://edpb.europa.eu/news/news/2023/edpb-welcomes-improvements-under-eu-us-data-privacy-framework-concerns-remain_en): The EDPB segmented it's concerns into two sections - commercial and public. (1) Commercial: the Data Privacy Framework / DPF provides for self-certification of US-entities, similar to how Privacy Shield worked. EDPB critiqued limitations to access rights, absence of key definitions, unclear applicability to processors, lack of specific rules on automated decision-making and profiling. (2) Public: the introduction of necessity and proportionality principles is good, but close monitoring is needed concerning the practical application of the newly introduced principles. EDPB also expresses concerns about the lack of a requirement of prior authorisation by an independent authority for the collection of data in bulk under Executive Order 12333, as well as the lack of systematic independent review ex post by a court. The template response that "no covered violations were identified or a determination requiring appropriate remediation was issued" also is troubling. In general, the critique is not overly harsh, and all concerns are worded as "lets see how it applies in practice".

- **Email disclosure to ad partners qualified as sharing health data and resulted in $7.8M fine for BetterHelp** (https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/202_3169-betterhelp-consent.pdf): 
  - **Background**: BetterHelp is a platform for finding therapists. When users sign on, they must fill out a questionnaire (the “Intake Questionnaire”), answering detailed questions about the Visitor’s mental health. Upon completing the Intake Questionnaire, a Visitor is prompted to create an account for the Service by entering the Visitor’s name or nickname, email address, phone number, and emergency contact information. BetterHelp engaged Facebook, Snapchat, Pinterest, and Criteo to market its services. By 2021 Respondent’s advertising on Facebook was bringing in approximately 30,000 to 40,000 new Users per quarter.
  - **Violations**: 
    - Summary: From 2013 to December 2020, however, Respondent continually broke these privacy promises, monetizing consumers’ health information to target them and others with advertisements for the Service. For example, from 2018 to 2020, Respondent used these consumers’ email addresses and the fact that they had previously been in therapy to instruct Facebook to identify similar consumers and target them with advertisements for the Service, bringing in tens of thousands of new paying users, and millions of dollars in revenue, as a result. To capitalize on these consumers’ health information, Respondent handed it over to numerous third-party advertising platforms, including Facebook, Pinterest, Snapchat, and Criteo, often permitting these companies to use the information for their own research and product development as well. 
    - Deception: The Intake Questionnaire included statements that your health information will stay private between you and your counselor, stated tht your email address with be kept strictly private and not disclosed to anyone. In November 2018, Respondent updated the privacy policy to state affirmatively that it would use and disclose this information only for limited purposes, such as to operate and improve the Service. These limited purposes did not include using or disclosing the information for advertising or disclosing the information to third parties for their own purposes. In September 2020, Respondent revised the privacy policy yet again, finally stating that it may both use and disclose Visitors’ and Users’ information for advertising. But, even then, the privacy policy continued to claim that Respondent would disclose this information to third parties for only the stated limited purposes, which did not include third parties’ own purposes.
    - Sharing health data for advertising: Since 2013, Respondent has repeatedly broken each of its aforementioned privacy promises, using Visitors’ and Users’ email addresses, IP addresses, enrollment in the Service, and certain Intake Questionnaire responses for various advertising purposes, including (1) retargeting Visitors with advertisements for the Service; (2) using Users’ health information to find and target potential new Users with advertisements—on the basis that these potential new Users were likely to sign up for the Service because they shared traits with current Users; and (3) optimizing Respondent’s advertisements, which involved targeting advertisements at individuals with attributes similar to those that had previously responded to Respondent’s ads, such as new Users. 
      - NB: Each such **disclosure of even a Visitor’s or User’s email address constituted a disclosure of the Visitor’s or User’s health information**. Specifically, because Respondent collected email addresses **only from Visitors and Users seeking mental health therapy** via the Service (by filling out the Intake Questionnaire, signing up for the Service, and/or becoming a User), disclosure of a Visitor’s or User’s email address implicitly identified the Visitor or User as one seeking and/or receiving mental health treatment via the Service. (para 48)
      - NB: Although Respondent **“hashed” Visitors’ and Users’ email addresses** (i.e., converted the email addresses into a sequence of letters and numbers through a cryptographic tool) before disclosing them to third parties, the hashing was not meant to conceal the Visitors’ and Users’ identities from Facebook. (para 49)
      - Marketing efforts: 
        - First, Respondent compiled lists of Visitors’ and Users’ email addresses, which it then uploaded to Facebook to match these individuals to their Facebook user accounts in order to target them and others like them with advertisements. Between 2017 and 2018, Respondent uploaded lists of over 7 million Visitors’ and Users’ email addresses to Facebook.
        - Second, from 2013 to December 2020, Respondent shared Visitors’ and Users’ email addresses, IP addresses, and records known as “Events” with Facebook. These Events automatically tracked certain actions of each Visitor and User on the Multi-Sites, such as when they answered certain questions on the Intake Questionnaire in a certain way or when a Visitor enrolled in the Service to become a User. Respondent recorded and automatically disclosed these Events to Facebook through web beacons Respondent had placed on each of the Multi-Sites. Respondent disclosed Visitors’ and Users’ IP addresses, email addresses, and/or other persistent identifiers to Facebook alongside the Events so that Facebook could match the Events. Respondent **labeled** the Intake Questionnaire responses concerning prior therapy and financial status **with anonymous Event titles** before giving them to Facebook; however, in July 2018, the previously mentioned inexperienced and insufficiently trained Junior Marketing Analyst whom Respondent had put in charge of Facebook advertising **revealed certain Events’ true meaning to Facebook via the Facebook employee** that serviced Respondent’s advertising account. For example, though an affirmative response to the question “Have you been in counseling or therapy before?” was coded as “AddToWishlist,” the analyst revealed to Facebook that this event meant that the “user completes questionnaire marking they have been in therapy before,” thereby disclosing millions of Visitors’ and Users’ prior therapy to Facebook.
        - Failure to limit third parties’ use of health information: In disclosing Visitors’ and Users’ health information to Facebook and other third parties, Respondent did not contractually limit how the third parties could use and disclose the data other than merely agreeing to these third parties’ general terms of service, **which either placed no restrictions on the third parties’ use and disclosure of the information or specifically permitted the third parties to use the information for their own purposes**. For example, Facebook’s Business Tools Terms, to which Respondent agreed, stated that it “may also use Event Data . . . for research and development purposes, and to . . . improve the Facebook Company Products.” Though Respondent has deleted some of the Visitor and User information it disclosed to third parties from those third parties’ advertising platforms, this **deletion did not remove the information from those third parties’ underlying databases**.
      - Respondent’s collection, use, and disclosure of millions of Visitors’ and Users’ health information without reasonable privacy practices or safeguards has caused or is likely to cause them substantial injury. This health information—including whether Visitors and Users have previously been in therapy, the fact that they are seeking therapy or in therapy via the Service, and whether their LGBTQ status is affecting their mental health, together with identifying information such as their email addresses and IP addresses—is highly sensitive. Disclosure of this information without these Visitors’ and Users’ authorization is likely to cause them stigma, embarrassment, and/or emotional distress. Exposure of this information may also affect these Visitors’ and Users’ ability to obtain and/or retain employment, housing, health insurance, or disability insurance.
  - **Decision**: To remedy the violations, the FTC prescribed to: (1) collect express consent for disclosing data to third parties; (2) stop misrepresenting privacy aspect of their processing to consumers; (3) in multiple stages and with oversight from FTC, perform deletion of previously disclosed data from its recipients; (4) notify users about the FTC decision via a template provided by FTC; (5) a mandatory privacy program (looks like a good template of what is part of a good company checklist!); (6) assessment by a Third-Party Assessor, annual certification; (7) $7.8M monetary relief and some minor & administrative provisions.

- **German Procurement Chamber rules that a US parent company is not a disqualifier from procurement due to risk of GDPR violation** (https://www.bundeskartellamt.de/SharedDocs/Entscheidung/DE/Entscheidungen/Vergaberecht/2023/VK2-114-22.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=5): This is a reversal of an earlier decision of the procurement body which denied contract to a EU subsidiary of a US entity citing the risk of Chapter V violation. This is undeniably a good development.

- **Norway to join list of countries ruling against GA due to Chapter V concerns** (https://www.datatilsynet.no/aktuelt/aktuelle-nyheter-2023/varsel-om-vedtak-i-google-analytics-saken/): As usual, the problem was Chapter V compliance in US-bound transfers. Both GA3 and GA4 are subject to risk.

- **Ireland fines company EUR460k for failure of availability of data belonging to 70k people** (https://www.dataprotection.ie/sites/default/files/uploads/2023-02/IN-21-2-4%20Final%20Decision_Redacted.pdf): This is a rare decision where a breach resulted not from unauthorized access but from loss of data. The fine is relatively high in comparison to other Art. 32 fines at EUR 6.5 per person (subjectively average is around 3.2).
  
- **NOYB tests companies' access requests based on cookie ids** (https://noyb.eu/en/data-brokers-identification-possible-sell-ads-not-exercise-fundamental-rights):  In order to obtain the information gathered on them, the users attached the cookies placed by the websites to their access request as a means of identification. Companies asked for other forms of identification (such as additional personal details) or ignored the request altogether. NOYB therefore filed several complaints against the relevant controllers due to their failure to respond to the access requests and adhere to the principle of data minimization. The NOYB press release somewhat confusingly mixes up "tracking cookies" and authentication, so it is not entirely clear what the intended effect was. 

- **The German regulator is undecided about TrustPID** (https://www.bfdi.bund.de/DE/Fachthemen/Inhalte/Telefon-Internet/Positionen/FAQ-TrustPID.html?nn=251928): Not so long ago a couple of European mobile network providers announced the launch of a web marketing project TrustPID. The project is based on generating a pseudonomous identifier based on IP address + phone number. According to the FAQ, these shall be collected subject to consent, separate from a cookie banner. Without calling the project illegal, the regulator expressed concern that it is hard to reconcile the position of trust of the network provider with user tracking. The final assessment is not possible at this moment. It is interesting that even consent is not sufficient to resolve the concerns that the regulator had.

- **Fastway Couriers fined EUR 15k for leaking 10k clients** (https://www.dataprotection.ie/en/resources/law/decisions/inquiry-ag-couriers-limited-ta-fastway-couriers-ireland-december-2022): The company misconfigured the servers and exposed client data to the open world. Out of 446k records, only 10k were accessed. These contained names, emails, phone numbers and home addresses.

- **EUR 25k fine for consent-less cookies in Hungary** (https://edpb.europa.eu/news/national-news/2023/hu-sa-decision-connection-legal-compliance-cookie-consent-management_en): The two websites in question had a very confusing cookie consent management system framework with two popups and lack of ability to reject cookies. 