# Week 12 - 18 June 2023

- **€4.98M fine against Spotify for unclear responses to access requests** (https://www.imy.se/en/news/administrative-fee-against-spotify/, https://www.imy.se/globalassets/dokument/beslut/2023/beslut-tillsyn-spotify.pdf): In the view of the DPA, Spotify's description of processing purposes could have been clearer. Especially technical data may need to be explained in the individual's own, native language. The DPA had issues with category names such as "user data" and "usage data" as they were very generic and non-informative. A response containing the criteria for storage periods was also regarded as incomplete. It's funny to read the press release that the DPA considered the violations to be minor and the fine was only €4.98M. In details ([English translation](spotify-sweden-case-en.md)):
  - Summary:
    - did not provide sufficiently clear information about purposes, categories of data, categories of recipients, periods of processing, sources of data, transfer safeguards;
    - provided technical log data accompanied by description in English only;
    - did not provide all data in response to one of the requests.
  - Description of processing (Art. 15.1):
    - Information provided by Spotify in accordance with Article 15 of the Data Protection Ordinance was generally designed. The same information was thus provided regardless of who requested access in accordance with Article 15. The information was thus not adapted based on each request for access.
    - IMY believes that such generally designed information may be suitable for standardized services that include personal data processing. However, in order for the registered to understand how their personal data is processed, it must always be possible to clearly and simply read out which information is applicable in which situations based on the information provided. Generally designed information must not lead to any ambiguities regarding whether the data subject is affected by the current information or not based on his individual situation. 
      - 🔴 Information on categories of personal data, purpose, recipient and source
        - Information on the purposes of the processing must refer to the purposes for which the data subject's personal data is actually processed, and must not simply consist of a list of various purposes without clarifying which purposes are current for the person requesting access.
        - Furthermore, information about the categories of personal data processed may need to be adapted to the circumstances of the data subject requesting access. ... These categories of personal data consisted of "user data", "usage data", "plan verification data", "voting data", "payment and purchase data" and "competition, survey and lottery data". The categories of personal data that were specified were generally held and in several cases, for example regarding "user data" and "usage data", did not contain a detailed description of which personal data could be included. 
        - When it comes to information about recipients or categories of recipients, such information should be as specific as possible.
        - All available information must be provided about where the personal data comes from, if the personal data was not collected from the data subject.
        - IMY therefore considers that Spotify has not provided sufficiently clear information.
      - 🔴 Information about storage period
        - Information provided about how long personal data is stored must be specific enough for the data subject to understand how long his personal data will be stored. 
        - Among other things, it was stated that by default personal data is kept for 90 days, unless a longer period is chosen due to a legitimate business reason.
        - The information on how long data is kept was generally designed and, with the exception of, among other things, the information on streaming history, not clearly linked to which categories of personal data were meant by the different storage times.
        - Furthermore, the criteria for determining the storage period specified in the information were in some cases very imprecise. For example, it is difficult for a data subject to understand what was included in "legitimate business reason" and thus in which situations personal data was kept longer than 90 days or what it meant that streaming history was "usually" kept for the lifetime of an account.
      - 🔴 Information about third country transfer
        - It should also normally be clear to which third countries the transfer has taken place.
        - IMY notes that the information provided by Spotify regarding third country transfers was generally designed and not linked to the data subject's own situation. It was not clear whether the data subject's personal data had been transferred to a third country, and if so, what appropriate protective measures had been taken during the transfer. It was also not clear to which third countries the transfer had taken place. 
    - Copy of data (Art. 15.1 and 15.3):
      - The copy of personal data that Spotify provides in accordance with Article 15.3 of the Data Protection Regulation can be given through three different answers, Type 1 (profile information and the personal data that Spotify has deemed to be of greatest interest to the registered), Type 2 (technical log ) and Type 3 (information that a data subject specifically requests and can, for example, refer to the data subject's listening history on a certain date).
        - When downloading Type 1 information, the registered person also receives a so-called "Read Me First" file. In the "Read Me First" file there is a link to the "Understand my data" webpage, where the format and personal data included in Type 1 are described. The linked pages are automatically displayed in the customer's preferred language based on the language setting in the customer's browser.
        - In the Type 2 information, which consists of technical log files, there is some information that is very technical in nature. To help data subjects understand the formatting of the personal data, Spotify provides a detailed description of the personal data in a special file in connection with the disclosure of the data (in a “Read Me First” file for Type 2 requests). This description is provided by default in English. 
      - Spotify has stated the following as a background to the fact that the description of the Type 2 data is provided in English by default. To ensure that the information provided by the company to the data subjects is correctly translated into their local language, the files to be translated on manual translation are sent to professional translators. In light of the fact that technical log data changes more dynamically over time than other personal data collected, the company would have to send the extensive "Read me First" file for translation several times a month. This would be disproportionate and unreasonable to do for all local languages given the additional time, resources and administration it would involve. 
      - 🟢 IMY considers that the fact that the data subject must take different measures to request the different layers of data may cause some inconvenience. However, the registered person has the opportunity to take all these actions at one and the same time. All measures can also be taken easily via Spotify's website. In an overall assessment, IMY considers that Spotify's routines enable the data subject to request access to all of their personal data in a sufficiently simple manner.
      - 🟢 IMY believes that information in the technical log files provided by Spotify can be complicated to understand, despite the descriptions provided by Spotify. However, IMY believes that Spotify, by providing these descriptions, makes it possible for the data subject, albeit with some work effort, to assimilate the information. 
      - 🔴 Spotify's stated difficulties in translating the description, including that translation may need to be done several times each month and the additional resources this requires, also cannot justify leaving the description in English by default. Taking into account the purpose of the right of access, it is crucial that the data subject understands which of his personal data has been processed in the technical log files, which presupposes an understandable description of its content. IMY therefore considers that Spotify should have provided the description in the local language already in connection with the provision of the technical log files to the data subject, at least to the extent necessary to understand the information in the technical log files.
    - Individual complaints:
      - 🔴 It was a mistake to provide the appellant with some of the technical log files in encrypted format. Spotify stores data in its systems in encrypted format to strengthen integrity and security in connection with the company's own internal processing of personal data. It was not Spotify's intention to withhold from the complainant personal data from him. Although most of the encrypted data was decrypted before being included in the appellant's technical log files, some of the fields were not decrypted. That kind of problem was fixed when it was discovered, and now requested personal data is always provided unencrypted.
      - 🔴 IMY assesses that Spotify, at the time of the complainant's request for access (2018), did not provide sufficiently clear information for the complainant to understand that the copy of personal data was divided. That there is sufficient information for a registered person to understand that their request only concerns a selection of the personal data being processed is a prerequisite for the personal data controller to be able to limit disclosure to this personal data. In the event that it is unclear whether the request only refers to a selection of the personal data, the person in charge of personal data should assume that the data subject wants access to all of his personal data.

- **Why couldn't a fortune telling company foresee an audit resulting in a EUR 150k fine?** (https://www.cnil.fr/en/online-clairvoyance-kg-com-fined-eur-150000): The fine includes a 30k cookie fine and a 120k GDPR fine: (1) recording all phone calls; (2) lack of consent for storing bank data for subsequent purchases; (3) lack of consent to special data processing; (4) bad security and failure to notify of breach. If I recall correctly, this is the first fine for lack of consent for saving credit cards for subsequent purchases - a risk I considered dormant due to lack of notable cases in furtherance to the EDPB Recommendations 02/2021 which excluded LI for such activities. 

- **Spain presents on online tool (in English!) stramlining RoPA, impact assessments** (https://gestiona2.aepd.es/): The tool provides for a nice repository of high-risk activities, whether based on data subject demographic, based on purposes such as profiling, types of data, effects of processing etc. I intend to use it precisely as inspiration for in-house PIAs.

- **Italy's battle against calls to people on the do-not-call register** (https://www.garanteprivacy.it/web/guest/home/docweb/-/docweb-display/docweb/9894662, https://www.garanteprivacy.it/web/guest/home/docweb/-/docweb-display/docweb/9893693, https://www.garanteprivacy.it/web/guest/home/docweb/-/docweb-display/docweb/9894631): Italian DPA issued 3 fines totalling EUR 8.5M for promotional calls to people who entered in the public do-not-call register. Its funny to see regional specialisation: Italy is constantly fighting spammers, Spain is fining SIM duplication etc.