# Week 19 - 25 June 2023

- **€40M fine against Criteo for behavioral retargeting** (https://www.cnil.fr/en/personalised-advertising-criteo-fined-eur-40-million): Criteo is a fairly well-known adtech player on the EU market. Criteo's clients install trackers which allows Criteo to analyse browsing behaviour and optimize ads in real time bidding. NOYB initiated a case with CNIL against Criteo in connection with lack of consent and other GDPR violations. CNIL found the following violations: (1) while collection of consent was Criteo client's responsibility, it is also responsible for demonstrating user consent. Some partners did not collect consent as mandated by GDPR, leading to Criteo's liability. Lack of contractual obligation to provide evidence of consent as well as lack of audits was cited as evidence of wrongdoing; (2) bad privacy notice lacking description of some purposes and very broad descriptions of others; (3) out of 6 tables, Criteo provided DSAR responses by exporting only 3 of them, but CNIL believed that 2 more tables were also of relevance. The exports lacked accompanying clarifications; (4) withdrawal of consent only resulted in stopping of display of personalised ads, but not erasure of identifiers assigned & navigational events. This one is interesting as I believe there was an earlier CNIL FAQ stating that collection is only available under consent, but subsequent processing may be based on other legal grounds. Hope to see this point argued in appeal. 

- **EC spokesman aims to approve US-bound transfers "by the summer"** (https://www.reuters.com/technology/eu-us-data-transfer-pact-expected-by-summer-eu-commission-says-after-meta-fine-2023-05-22/): Back on May 22, a Commission spokesman stated that the EC expects the data protection framework between the EU and the U.S. to be fully functionable "by the summer". I am not sure if "by the summer" is literally before it, middle or end.

- **CJEU provides minor limitation on data access rights** (https://curia.europa.eu/jcms/upload/docs/application/pdf/2023-06/cp230107en.pdf): A former employee requested the bank to provide access to data which employees of the bank had had access to their bank account, the time and reason for such access. CJEU ruled that DSAR scope included the access events, but not the identities of people who had access, unless such information is essential to effectively exercise the subject's rights. I'd say that this is a small concession to common sense and does not provide any significant reduction to current scope of access rights.

- **Dutch DPIA & DTIA of AWS** (https://slmmicrosoftrijk.nl/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/DPIA-AWS-EC2-S3-RDS-P-20230622.pdf, https://slmmicrosoftrijk.nl/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/DTIA-Dutch-Government-AWS-.pdf): Similar to how the Dutch reviewed Microsoft 365, they now published a DPIA for AWS. Please treat yourself to reading the DPIA, it provides extensive description on AWS services and their GDPR assessment. It is also practically useful as numerous companies rely on AWS for their hosting services. All 9 identified privacy risks were classified as low. The DTIA is performed based on Rosenthal's templates, and, interestingly, takes into account the number of cases of access in the USA and other factual probabilities, which goes against the current mainstream in the EU of finding any level of risk of foreign access to be unacceptable. 

- **ICO updated privacy enhancing tech guide** (https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/uk-gdpr-guidance-and-resources/data-sharing/privacy-enhancing-technologies/): ICO provides descriptions and comparisons between different PETs, including their weaknesses and mappings to data protection principles. You can start with the reference table at https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/uk-gdpr-guidance-and-resources/data-sharing/privacy-enhancing-technologies/what-pets-are-there/reference-table/ and go from there. From a practical perspective, I hardly heard any significant developments since last year. Most PETs are very expensive either in terms of engineering talent required to launch and maintain such solutions and/or in terms of computing power required for them. I get the feeling that for most companies it is easier to hire lawyers to squash the privacy problem with endless paper-based assessments rather than technical controls.

- **CEDPO opinion on AI Act impact on DPOs** (https://cedpo.eu/wp-content/uploads/20221219-CEDPO_Opinion_AI_Act_DPO.pdf): The Confederation of European Data Protection Organisations published its thoughts on how the DPO role will be affected by the AI Act. While many GDPR and AI Act obligaitons are similar in nature, e.g. risk management & assessments, record keeping, application of governance standards, the subject-matter of the laws and required expertise will be different. As a result, CEDPO foresees the creation of AI Officer position and finds that compliance with AI Act by existing DPOs is undesirable. Nevertheless, DPO will be affected by the AI Act and most AI use-cases will require a DPIA and will affect responses to data subject requests. 