# 8-29 Oct 2023

- **EDPB selects Right to access as focus for its coordinated action in 2024** (https://edpb.europa.eu/news/news/2023/edpb-picks-topic-2024-coordinated-action_en): During its October plenary, the EDPB selected the topic for its third coordinated enforcement action, which will concern the implementation of the right of access by controllers. 

- **France imposes EUR 600k fine Groupe Canal + for direct marketing violations** (https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/cnil/id/CNILTEXT000048222771):
  - Consent may be collected on behalf of another controller. See section 27 of the decision: "... in the event of consent collected by the first-time collector on behalf of prospectors, an exhaustive and updated list is made available to people at the time of obtaining their consent, for example directly on the collection medium. or, if this is too long, via a hypertext link to the said list and the confidentiality policies of service providers and suppliers".
  - Lack of details on retention periods is in breach of Art. 13. The wording "... your personal data is kept for periods determined with regard to our purposes and the legal, tax and accounting obligations incumbent upon us. The data linked to your subscription is subject to electronic archiving for the entire subscription period and during the legal limitation periods." was found to be imprecise and non-informative. 
  - Approximate fine is EUR 1 / person: the decision mentions that by 2021, the number of people subject to marketing by the controller has been 588 324, making the fine calculation easy.