# June 2024

- **EUR 1.3M fine against Avanza Bank AB for Meta pixel** (https://www.imy.se/nyheter/sanktionsavgift-mot-avanza-for-overforing-av-personuppgifter-till-meta/, https://www.imy.se/globalassets/dokument/beslut/2024/beslut-tillsyn-avanza.pdf): The bank used a so-called Meta pixel on its website and app and which meant that information about, for example, customers' securities holdings and account numbers was transferred to Meta. Avanza has used Meta's analysis tool Facebook pixel (now the Meta pixel) both on its website and in its app in order to optimize the bank's marketing on Facebook. The incorrect transfer of personal data was caused by the bank accidentally activating new sub-functions in the Meta pixel. 

- **Meta abandons its plans to train its LLM on European's data following NOYB pressure** (https://www.dataprotection.ie/en/news-media/latest-news/dpcs-engagement-meta-ai): The DPC welcomes the decision by Meta to pause its plans to train its large language model using public content shared by adults on Facebook and Instagram across the EU/EEA. This decision followed intensive engagement between the DPC and Meta. The DPC, in co-operation with its fellow EU data protection authorities, will continue to engage with Meta on this issue.

- **Italy fines Meta EUR 3.5M for consumer law violations** (https://www.agcm.it/media/comunicati-stampa/2024/6/PS12566): In the Instagram registration process, users have not received clear information on the collection and use of their data for commercial purposes. The Authority has ascertained that Meta, in violation of articles 20, 21 and 22 of the Consumer Code, has not immediately informed users registered on Instagram via the web of the use of their personal data for commercial purposes. In addition, the Authority has ascertained that, in violation of article 20 of the Consumer Code, Meta has not precisely managed the suspension of its users' Facebook and Instagram accounts. In particular, Meta did not indicate how it decides to suspend Facebook accounts (if following an automated or human review) and did not provide Facebook and Instagram users with information on the possibility of contesting the suspension of their accounts (they can contact an out-of-court dispute resolution body or a judge). 

- **CJEU on non-material damages** (https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=287303&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=6578598, ): The cases are quite similar to a case reported in [April'24](../april/300424.md) and [December'23](../../2023/december/311223.md). 
  - Joined Cases C‑182/22 and C‑189/22
    - **Background**: Scalable Capital, a company incorporated under German law, manages a trading application. In 2020, personal data and data relating to the deposit made by those applicants were seized by third parties whose identity remains unknown. The applicants in the main proceedings brought an action before the Amtsgericht München (Local Court, Munich, Germany), which is the referring court, seeking compensation for the non-material damage which they claim to have suffered as a result of the theft of their personal data.
    - **Rulings**: Article 82(1) of the GDPR must be interpreted as:
      - the right to compensation laid down in that provision fulfils an exclusively compensatory function, in that financial compensation based on that provision must allow the damage suffered to be compensated in full; 
      - not requiring that the severity and the possible intentional nature of the infringement of that regulation by the controller be taken into account for the purposes of compensation for damage under that provision; and
      - when determining the amount of damages due in respect of the right to compensation for non-material damage, it is appropriate to consider that such damage caused by a personal data breach is not, by its nature, less significant than physical injury;
      - where damage is established, a national court may, where that damage is not serious, compensate for it by awarding minimal compensation to the data subject, provided that that compensation is such as to compensate in full for the damage suffered. GDPR does not require that, following a proven infringement of provisions of that regulation, the damage alleged by the data subject must reach a ‘de minimis threshold’ in order to give rise to a right to compensation.
      - meaning that the concept of ‘identity theft’, in order to be classified as such and to give rise to a right to compensation for non-material damage under that provision, implies that the identity of a person affected by a theft of personal data has actually been misused by a third party. 
  - Case C‑590/22
    - **Background**: 
      - AT and BT, are clients of PS, a tax consultancy firm. They informed that consultancy firm of their change of postal address, which was recorded in PS’s data processing computer system. The new address of the applicants in the main proceedings was subsequently used by PS to send a number of letters. Applicants in the main proceedings asked PS to draw up their tax return for 2019. Having received no reply, they contacted PS, who informed them that that tax return had indeed been sent to them by post on 29 September 2020, without specifying the address to which that letter had been sent. 
      - The new occupants of their former address informed them that an envelope sent in their name had arrived at that address and that they had opened it by mistake. One of those new occupants stated that, having established that the letter in question was not addressed to him, he had placed the documents he had found in that envelope back into it. He then handed that envelope to close relatives living in the vicinity of the former address of the applicants in the main proceedings so that they could collect it. 
      - The applicants in the main proceedings brought an action before the Amtsgericht Wesel (Local Court, Wesel, Germany), which is the referring court, seeking, on the basis of Article 82(1) of the GDPR, compensation for the non-material damage which they believe they have suffered as a result of the disclosure of their personal data to third parties and which they assess at EUR 15 000.
    - **Rulings**: Article 82(1) of the GDPR must be interpreted as:
      - infringement of that regulation is not, in itself, sufficient to give rise to a right to compensation under that provision. The data subject must also establish the existence of damage caused by that infringement, without, however, that damage having to reach a certain degree of seriousness;
      - a person’s fear that his or her personal data have, as a result of an infringement of that regulation, been disclosed to third parties, without it being possible to establish that that was in fact the case, is sufficient to give rise to a right to compensation, provided that that fear, with its negative consequences, is duly proven;
      - in order to determine the amount of damages due as compensation for damage based on that provision, it is not necessary, first, to apply mutatis mutandis the criteria for setting the amount of administrative fines laid down in Article 83 of that regulation and, second, to confer on that right to compensation a dissuasive function;
      - in order to determine the amount of damages due as compensation for damage based on that provision, it is not necessary to take account of simultaneous infringements of national provisions which relate to the protection of personal data but which are not intended to specify the rules of that regulation.

- **Protecting Americans' Data from Foreign Adversaries Act of 2024** (https://www.congress.gov/bill/118th-congress/house-bill/815/text#toc-HCC58F0DED71047C2BE42E0885BA5AB4D): The act generally prohibits data brokers from transferring personally identifiable sensitive data to certain named foreign adversary countries, including the People’s Republic of China (“PRC”), and any entity controlled by certain foreign adversaries.
