# Week 27 March - 2 April 2023

- **ChatGPT banned in Italy** (https://www.garanteprivacy.it/web/guest/home/docweb/-/docweb-display/docweb/9872832): In its order, the Italian SA highlights that: (1) no information is provided to users and data subjects whose data are collected by Open AI; (2) there appears to be no legal basis underpinning the massive collection and processing of personal data in order to ‘train’ the algorithms on which the platform relies; (3) the information made available by ChatGPT does not always match factual circumstances, so that inaccurate personal data are processed; and (4) lack of whatever age verification mechanism exposes children to receiving responses that are absolutely inappropriate to their age and awareness. The ban will have immediate effect and that OpenAI must communicate within 20 days the measures undertaken to implement the provisions and to provide any element deemed useful to justify the violations

- **CNIL fines e-scooter company for collecting geotags, bad DPAs and lack of reCAPTCHA consent** (https://www.cnil.fr/en/geolocation-rental-scooters-cityscoot-fined-eu125000): The French CNIL found 3 violations:
  - (1) the company was collecting vehicle geolocation data for various reasons: processing of traffic offences; processing of customer complaints; user support (to call for help if a user falls); management of claims and thefts. CNIL considers that none of these purposes justifies the collection of geolocation data in such detail as that carried out by the company. CNIL went quite deep into how the app functions and stated that collecting geo-location every 30 seconds for purposes of correctly terminating the rent is excessive as the user can directly contact CITYSCOOT to resolve difficulties.
  - (2) three contracts concluded with CITYSCOOT's processors did not contain all the information required by the GDPR. This violation, together with the first one, cost the company EUR 100k; and
  - (3) the company did not provide any information to the users and did not obtain their prior consent before using reCAPTCHA. In section 86, CNIL qualifies that reCaptcha should be subject to consent: "reCaptcha Google mechanism does not only secure the authentication mechanism for the benefit of users but also allows analysis operations on the part of Google,what Google itself specifies in its general conditions of use". This violation cost the company an additional EUR 25k.

- **Germany allows paid alternative to tracking** (https://datenschutzkonferenz-online.de/media/pm/DSK_Beschluss_Bewertung_von_Pur-Abo-Modellen_auf_Websites.pdf): Similar to the Danish guidance not so long ago (https://www.datatilsynet.dk/hvad-siger-reglerne/vejledning/cookies/cookie-walls), the German federal regulator endorses paid alternatives to tracking. It appears that the conditions are similar: customary payment level, equivalent service offering, setting only absolutely necessary cookies for paid users. 

<details><summary><b>Evaluation of pure subscription models on websites</b></summary>
The conference of the independent data protection supervisory authorities of the federal and state governments (DSK) decides in connection with so-called pure subscription models on websites: 

1. In principle, the tracking of user behavior (tracking) can be based on consent if a tracking-free model is offered as an alternative , even if this is subject to payment. However, the service that users receive with a payment model must firstly represent an equivalent alternative to the service that they obtain through consent. Secondly, the consent must meet all the effectiveness requirements standardized in the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), i. H. in particular, meet the requirements listed in Art. 4 No. 11 and Art. 7 DS-GVO.1

2. Whether the payment option - e.g. B. a monthly subscription - is to be regarded as an equivalent alternative to consent to tracking depends in particular on whether the user is given equivalent access to the same service for a fee that is customary in the market. As a rule, access is equivalent if the offers at least basically include the same service.

3. If users take advantage of the offer as part of a "tracking-free" subscription and do not give any additional consent, according to § 25 Para. 1 of the Act on Data Protection and Protection of Privacy in Telecommunications and Telemedia (TTDSG) only storage and Reading processes take place that are absolutely necessary for the telemedia service you expressly request. Subsequent processing of personal data is only permitted if the requirements of the GDPR, in particular the legal permissions according to Art. 6 Para. 1 GDPR and, depending on the individual case, Art. 9 GDPR, are met. In this regard, reference is made to the general statements in the DSK's orientation guide for providers of telemedia (OH Telemedien 2021, Version 1.1).

4. The effectiveness of the consent of non-subscribers must be ensured for the so-called pure subscription models. If there are several processing purposes that differ significantly from one another, the requirements for voluntariness must be met in such a way that consent can be granted on a granular basis. This means, among other things, that users must be able to actively select the individual purposes for which consent is to be obtained (opt-in). A bundling of purposes can only be considered if the purposes are very closely related. A blanket overall consent for different purposes cannot be effectively granted.

5. In addition, the consent must meet the other requirements of the GDPR, in particular those relating to transparency, comprehensibility and information for the data subjects from Art. 4 No. 11 and Art. 7 Para. 2 GDPR (cf. the Orientation guide of the DSK for providers of telemedia (OH Telemedien 2021, Version 1.1).
</details>


- **Further growing US privacy legislation: updates from NY, Washington** (https://www.nysenate.gov/legislation/bills/2023/s5555, https://app.leg.wa.gov/billsummary?billnumber=1155&year=2023#billhistorytitle): In NY, a bill was introduced to the Senate providing wide data subject rights, outlining principles of use limition, confidentiality, storage limitation, transparency. In Washington, the My Health My Data Act is being reviewed in the Senate.  

- **ICO guidance on direct marketing in regulatory communication messages** (https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/direct-marketing-guidance-and-resources/direct-marketing-and-regulatory-communications/#who): In some regulated industries, companies are required to send out messages to their customers. This does not preclude their qualification as direct marketing. The guideline contains tips on how to understand if marketing rules apply to such messages.