# October 1-31

## CJEU decisions:
- **CJEU decides on definition of health data in Amazon Marketplace case** (https://curia.europa.eu/jcms/upload/docs/application/pdf/2024-10/cp240159en.pdf, https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=290696&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=4091179): ND, which operates a pharmacy under the business name „Lindenapotheke “, has been selling pharmacopoeias that require pharmacies since 2017 via the online platform „Amazon Marketplace “ (hereinafter: Amazon). When ordering these medicines online, ND customers must enter information such as their name, delivery address and the information necessary for the individualization of the medicines. DR, who also runs a pharmacy, brought an action before the Dessau-Roßlau district court (Germany), requesting that **ND be banned from selling pharmacy-only medicines via Amazon under the threat of regulatory means, as long as it is not ensured that customers have the opportunity in advance to consent to the processing of health data.**
  - Chapter VIII of the GDPR must be interpreted as not precluding national legislation which, alongside the powers of intervention of the DPA, confers on competitors of the person allegedly responsible for an infringement of the laws protecting personal data standing to bring proceedings against that person, by means of an action before the civil courts, for infringements of that regulation and on the basis of the prohibition of unfair commercial practices.
  - Article 9(1) of the GDPR must be interpreted as meaning that, in a situation where the operator of a pharmacy markets pharmacy-only medicinal on an online platform, the information which the customers of that operator enter when ordering the medicinal products online, such as their name, the delivery address and the details required for individualising the medicinal products, constitutes data concerning health, even where the sale of those medicinal products does not require a prescription.
- **CJEU says that publishing personal data in public corporate registers can amount to non-material damage subject to compensation** (https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=290701&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=lst&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=4017440):  OL is a member of ‘Praven Shtit Konsulting’ OOD, a limited liability company governed by Bulgarian law, which was registered on 14 January 2021 in the commercial register following the submission of a company’s constitutive instrument dated 30 December 2020. OL requested the Agency to erase the personal data relating to her contained in that constitutive instrument, stating that, if the processing of those data was based on her consent, she was withdrawing that consent, but the Agency did not respond. 
  - Article 82(1) of Regulation 2016/679: must be interpreted as meaning that a loss of control, for a limited period, by the data subject over his or her personal data, on account of those data being made available online to the public, in the commercial register of a Member State, may suffice to cause ‘non-material damage’, provided that that data subject demonstrates that he or she has actually suffered such damage, however minimal, without that concept of ‘non-material damage’ requiring that the existence of additional tangible adverse consequences be demonstrated.

## EDPB and DPA guidance

- **EDPB plans for 2025** (https://www.edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/our-documents/strategy-work-programme/edpb-work-programme-2024-2025_en): 
  - Pillar 1: Enhancing harmonisation and promoting compliance, incl. developing:
	- Guidelines on anonymisation
	- Guidelines on pseudonymisation
	- Guidelines on legitimate interest
	- Guidelines on children’s data
	- Guidelines on “consent or pay” models
	- Guidelines on the processing of data for scientific research purposes
	- Document on Age verification criteria
  - Pillar 2: Reinforcing a common enforcement culture and effective cooperation, such as implementing the Coordinated Enforcement Framework (CEF), including:  
    - The 2024 CEF on the **implementation of the right of access** by controllers
  	- A fourth coordinated action to be launched in 2025, on a topic to be determined once the third action is completed.
  - Pillar 3: Safeguarding data protection in the developing digital  and cross-regulatory landscape, incl.:
  	- Guidelines on the interplays between EU data protection law and other EU laws, including separate guidelines for each of the AI Act, the Digital Services Act, the Digital Markets Act
  	- Document concerning anti-money laundering and countering financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) requirements
  	- Guidelines on generative AI – data scraping  
  	- Document on the mandatory user accounts on online shopping websites
  	- Guidelines on telemetry and diagnostic data
  - Pillar 4: Contributing to the global dialogue on data protection
- **EDPB finalizes ePrivacy Guidelines** (https://www.edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/our-documents/guidelines/guidelines-22023-technical-scope-art-53-eprivacy-directive_en): Compared to pre-consultation version, nothing has changed significantly. See earlier reporting on highlights: [](../../2023/november/301123.md). Importantly, paras 48-50 still considers URL tags to fall within the scope of ePrivacy. Same for IP address.
- **EDPB's new Legitimate Interest Guidelines** (https://www.edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/documents/public-consultations/2024/guidelines-12024-processing-personal-data-based_en): 
  - 3 cumulative conditions for LI (para 6):
	- First, the pursuit of a legitimate interest by the controller or by a third party;
    	- An “interest” is the broader stake or benefit that a controller or third party may have in engaging in a specific processing activity. 
    	- An interest may be regarded as “legitimate” if the following cumulative criteria are met:
        	- The interest is lawful
        	- The interest is clearly and precisely articulated
        	- The interest is real and present, and not speculative
	- Second, the need to process personal data for the purposes of the legitimate interest(s) pursued (i.e., the processing of personal data must be “necessary” for those purposes); and
    	- whether in practice the legitimate data processing interests pursued cannot reasonably be achieved just as effectively by other means less restrictive of the fundamental rights and freedoms
	- Third, the interests or fundamental freedoms and rights of the concerned data subjects do not take precedence over the legitimate interest(s) of the controller or of a third party.
    	- controller must identify and describe:
        	- subjects’ interests, fundamental rights and freedoms
        	- impact of the processing on data subjects
        	- reasonable expectations of the data subject
        	- final balancing of opposing rights and interests, including the possibility of further mitigating measures
  - Right to object
    - controller shall no longer process the personal data unless there are overriding compelling legitimate grounds which take precedence over the interests and rights and freedoms of that person, which it is for the controller to demonstrate.
    - The notion of “compelling legitimate grounds” is not defined in the GDPR. However, it is clear from the wording of Article 21 GDPR that the assessment to be made by the controller to demonstrate that there are legitimate grounds that take precedence over the interests and rights and freedoms of the data subject is different from the balancing exercise to be made under Article 6(1)(f) GDPR
    - In other words, **not all conceivable legitimate interests** that may justify processing under Article 6(1)(f) GDPR are relevant in this context. Only **interests that can be recognised as “compelling” may be balanced** against the rights, freedoms and interests of the data subject to assess whether there are grounds for processing that take precedence, despite the objection of the data subject.
  - Right to erasures
    - if an objection under Article 21(1) GDPR is granted, a related erasure request under Article 17(1)(c) GDPR should also be granted.
- **EPDB's opinion on (sub)processors** (https://www.edpb.europa.eu/system/files/2024-10/edpb_opinion_202422_relianceonprocessors-sub-processors_en.pdf): 
  - controllers should have the information on the identity (i.e. name, address, contact person) of all processors, sub-processors etc. readily available at all times so that they can best fulfil their obligations under Article 28 GDPR
  - engagement of processors should not lower the level of protection for the rights of data subjects. The controller’s obligation to verify whether the (sub-)processors present ‘sufficient guarantees’ to implement the appropriate measures determined by the controller should apply regardless of the risk to the rights and freedoms of data subjects. However, the extent of such verification will in practice vary depending on the nature of these technical and organisational measures, which may be stricter or more extensive depending on the level of such riskю
- **German DPA issues clarifications on deceptive designs** (https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/faq-zu-deceptive-design-patterns/): The guidance is a continuation of the EDPB's Guidelines 3/2022 on Dark patterns in social media platform interfaces. It covers and provides examples of Overloading; Skipping; Stirring; Obstructing; Fickle; Left in the Dark patterns and provides best practices solutions.
- **Latvia's guide on transparency** (https://www.dvi.gov.lv/lv/jaunums/dviskaidro-kados-veidos-datu-subjektam-var-sniegt-informaciju-par-datu-apstradi): Not in all cases the publication of a privacy policy is sufficient to ensure that a person is informed of the processing of his data in a timely and full manner. Therefore, this time we will look at additional ways and formats for organizations to fulfill their information responsibilities.
  
## Enforcement

- **Irish Data Protection Commission fines LinkedIn Ireland €310 million** (https://www.dataprotection.ie/en/news-media/press-releases/irish-data-protection-commission-fines-linkedin-ireland-eu310-million): The inquiry examined LinkedIn’s processing of personal data for the purposes of behavioural analysis and targeted advertising of users who have created LinkedIn profiles (members). The decision includes a reprimand, an order for LinkedIn to bring its processing into compliance, and administrative fines totalling €310 million. The DPC’s final decision records the following findings of infringement of the GDPR:
    - Article 6 GDPR and Article 5(1)(a) GDPR, insofar as it requires the processing of personal data to be lawful, as LinkedIn:
        - Did not validly rely on Article 6(1)(a) GDPR (**consent**) to process third party data of its members for the purpose of behavioural analysis and targeted advertising on the basis that the consent obtained by LinkedIn was not freely given, sufficiently informed or specific, or unambiguous.
        - Did not validly rely on Article 6(1)(f) GDPR (**legitimate interests**) for its processing of first party personal data of its members for behavioural analysis and targeted advertising, or third party data for analytics, as LinkedIn’s interests were overridden by the interests and fundamental rights and freedoms of data subjects.
        - Did not validly rely on Article 6(1)(b) GDPR (**contractual necessity**) to process first party data of its members for the purpose of behavioural analysis and targeted advertising.
    - Articles 13(1)(c) and 14(1)(c) GDPR, in respect of the information LinkedIn provided to data subjects regarding its reliance on Article 6(1)(a), Article 6(1)(b) and Article 6(1)(f) GDPR as lawful bases.
    - Article 5(1)(a) GDPR, the principle of fairness.
- **CNIL fines TELEMAQUE €150k and COSMOSPACE €250k  for excessive personal data retention, collection of sensitive data** (https://www.cnil.fr/en/online-clairvoyance-cosmospace-and-telemaque-fined-eu250000-and-eu150000): 
  - COSMOSPACE systematically **recorded all telephone calls** made between clairvoyants, customers and switchboard operators. The company considered that such recordings were justified to **monitor the service quality and for training purposes**. The restricted committee considered that these **purposes did not justify recording all calls** in a complete and systematic manner, specifying that these recordings should be limited.
  - COSMOSPACE retained its **customers’ data for six years** from the end of the commercial relationship, in order to be able to send commercial prospection communications. CNIL recommended a **retention period limited to three years for this purpose**. 
- **£750,000 for data breach of Irish police officers** (https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/media-centre/news-and-blogs/2024/10/what-price-privacy-poor-psni-procedures-culminate-in-750k-fine/):  As the information was analysed for disclosure, multiple other worksheets were created within the downloaded Excel file. On completion, all visible onscreen worksheet tabs were deleted from the Excel file. The original worksheet, containing the personal details, remained unnoticed and this was also not picked up despite quality assurance. The data included: surnames and first name initials, job role, rank, grade, department, location of post, contract type, gender and PSNI service and staff number.  
- **EUR 80k fine for keeping emails after relationship termination** (https://www.garanteprivacy.it/home/docweb/-/docweb-display/docweb/10066116#2): The Guarantor, who intervened following the complaint lodged by a sales agent, ascertained that during the collaboration relationship, through a software, the company had made a backup of the e-mail, keeping both the contents and the access logs to the email and to the corporate management. In defining the procedure, the **Guarantor stated that the systematic conservation of emails - carried out for a considerable period of time (equal to three years after the termination of the relationship) – and the systematic conservation of access logs to e-mail and management used by workers did not comply with the data protection regulations.** In fact, this conservation was not proportionate and necessary to achieve the purposes declared by the Company to guarantee the security of the IT network and the continuity of the company's business.This also allowed the Company to reconstruct, in detail, the activity of the collaborator, thus incurring a form of control prohibited by the Workers' Statute.
- **EUR 40k per day for non-compliance cookie banner** (https://noyb.eu/en/noyb-win-belgian-dpa-settlement-turned-proper-legal-orders-deceptive-cookie-banners): Belgian DPA dismissed complaints on the basis of strange theories about allegedly “forced” complainants. In fact, even when complainants explicitly gave oral testimony that they wished to be represented by _noyb_, the Belgian DPA argued that _noyb_ can't validly represent affiliated people in “model cases”. In this latest case, the Belgian DPA also seems to have done a U-turn on this narrative, claiming that in the present case, the _noyb_-affiliated individuals had in fact validly mandated _noyb._
- **Not honouring objection under Art. 21 cost Santander EUR 50k** (https://www.aepd.es/documento/ps-00380-2023.pdf): A customer continued receiving postal advertising despite expressing objection. The Spanish DPA fined Santander Bank EUR 50k for that.
- **Swiss DPA finds cross-platform tracking requires consent** (https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home/kurzmeldungen/nsb_mm.msg-id-102867.html): Ricardo and the TX Group were processing personal data, particularly as the data on the users were always linked to a unique pseudonym. He also found that the cross-platform tracking led to the creation of personality profiles and that Ricardo members were not adequately informed about the tracking and the subsequent use of data for targeted advertising. The resulting breaches of privacy could not be justified by the overriding private interests that Ricardo and the TX Group claimed. Furthermore, valid consent was not obtained, not least because users of the Ricardo platform were not adequately informed about the data processing.

## Misc
- **14 US attorney generals sue TikTok for COPPA violations** (https://oag.ca.gov/news/press-releases/attorney-general-bonta-attorney-general-james-lead-coalition-suing-tiktok): Our investigation has revealed that TikTok cultivates social media addiction to boost corporate profits. TikTok intentionally targets children because they know kids do not yet have the defenses or capacity to create healthy boundaries around addictive content,” **said Attorney General Rob Bonta.** “When we look at the youth mental health crisis and the revenue machine TikTok has created, fueled by the time and attention of our young people, it’s devastatingly obvious: Our children and teens never stood a chance against these social media behemoths. TikTok must be held accountable for the harms it created in taking away the time — and childhoods — of American children. TikTok’s misconduct includes: 
  - **Deploying a content-recommendation system designed to be addictive in order to maximize the time young users spend on the platform.** TikTok’s algorithmic features are designed to keep minors on the platform as long as possible and as often as possible, despite the dangers of compulsive use.
  - **Using manipulative features to addict young users and maximize their time on its platform.** These features exploit children's psychological vulnerabilities and are deployed to keep kids and teens on the platform for longer.
  	- _BEAUTY FILTERS_ Beauty filters and effects are deeply harmful to young users; they foster unrealistic beauty standards, harm self-esteem, and can induce negative body image issues and related physical and mental disorders. TikTok knows these filters and effects significantly increase platform use, particularly among young users, and retains these features despite their harms.
  	- _AUTOPLAY_. To manipulate users into compulsively spending more time on the platform, TikTok does not allow them to disable Autoplay. TikTok uses Autoplay to continuously play new and temporary posts; this exploits young users’ novelty-seeking minds and eliminates their autonomy to choose to stop.
  	- _ENDLESS/INFINITE SCROLL_. Endless scrolling compels young users to spend more time on the platform by making it difficult to disengage. It strips away a natural stopping point or opportunity to turn to a new activity and distorts users’ perception of time.
  	- _TIKTOK STORIES AND TIKTOK LIVE_. Content on these features is only available temporarily — users must tune in immediately or lose the opportunity to interact. These time-sensitive features are designed to encourage young users to compulsively return to the platform by exploiting their uniquely sensitive fear of missing out. 
  	- _PUSH NOTIFICATIONS_. Push notifications unfairly entice young users by overloading and overwhelming them to return to the platform. Some pushes are designed to keep young users from quitting the platform altogether, and others encourage young users to open the application. TikTok has even used fake notifications to manipulate users into opening its platform. 
  	- _LIKES AND COMMENTS_. At key development states it can be overwhelmingly important for children and teens to be accepted by their peers. TikTok’s design and display of highlighting “likes” as a form of social validation has an especially powerful effect on young users and can neurologically alter teenagers’ perception of online posts, in addition to driving compulsive use.
  - **Engaging in a scheme that deceptively markets the platform and platform features as promoting young users’ safety and well-being.** TikTok employs a coordinated array of features, tools, content moderation efforts, community guidelines, and public assurances intended to promote a public narrative that the platform is appropriate and safe for young users and that TikTok prioritizes user safety. In truth, such features and efforts do not work as advertised, the harmful effects of the platform are far greater than acknowledged, and TikTok does not prioritize safety over profit.
  - **Exploiting children’s data without parental notice or consent.** Despite knowing certain users are under 13 years old and despite the platform being directed toward children, TikTok has collected and used personal information from children's accounts without parental consent or notice. Doing so is both unfair and fails to satisfy TikTok’s obligations under federal law.
- **FTC announces Click-to-Cancel Rule; Immediately Challenged by Industry** (https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2024/10/federal-trade-commission-announces-final-click-cancel-rule-making-it-easier-consumers-end-recurring, https://www.theverge.com/2024/10/23/24278020/ftc-click-to-cancel-subscriptions-rule-lawsuit-telecoms-security-advertising-groups): The rule also will prohibit sellers from misrepresenting any material facts while using negative option marketing; require sellers to provide important information before obtaining consumers’ billing information and charging them; and require sellers to get consumers’ informed consent to the negative option features before charging them. Three industry groups, the NCTA, the Electronic Security Association (ESA), and the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB), are suing to prevent the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) from enforcing its new “Click to Cancel” rule that requires companies to make it easy to cancel subscriptions. Their complaint (included below) alleges the rule is “arbitrary, capricious, and an abuse of discretion,” as reported previously by Reuters.
- **Meta implements data combination controls following anti-trust proceedings in Germany** (https://www.bundeskartellamt.de/SharedDocs/Meldung/EN/Pressemitteilungen/2024/10_10_2024_Facebook.html?nn=48916): Meta had gradually taken or agreed to take the following measures to implement the authority’s decision:
  - Introducing an Accounts Centre (see [press release of 7 June 2023](https://www.bundeskartellamt.de/SharedDocs/Meldung/EN/Pressemitteilungen/2023/07_06_2023_Meta_Daten.html?nn=48916 "Meta (Facebook) introduces new accounts center – an important step in the implementation of the Bundeskartellamt’s decision")) to keep data collected from Meta’s different services separate: The Accounts Centre allows users to decide themselves which Meta services (e.g. Facebook and Instagram) they would like to connect and thus allow data to be shared between these services also for advertising purposes. It is still possible to use the services separately without experiencing a significant loss in quality.
  - Introducing “cookie” settings that allow Facebook data to be separated from other data: Facebook’s “cookie” settings now allow users to decide whether they want to allow their Facebook data to be combined with data Meta collects from third-party websites or apps using its so-called business tools. This also applies to Instagram.
  - Special exception for Facebook Login: Users who choose not to combine their Facebook data with their data collected while using other websites or apps can make an exception for Facebook Login to still be able to use this log-in option in third-party apps or on third-party websites. Previously, users had to allow Meta to combine all user data with data from third-party apps or websites if they wanted to use Facebook Login.
  - Concise customer information: To help Meta’s customers quickly find the relevant settings to prevent the unwanted combination of data by Meta, users who have agreed to data being combined in the past are shown prominent notifications when accessing Facebook. These notifications contain direct links to the newly designed consent options.
  - User navigation: Meta has added a prominent notice at the beginning of its data policy, informing users about their options ([https://en-gb.facebook.com/privacy/policy/?entry_point=facebook_page_footer](https://de-de.facebook.com/privacy/policy/ "External link Link zur Datenrichtlinie Wahlmöglichkeiten der Nutzenden") “How to manage the info that we use”). This contains a short explanation and links to the Accounts Centre and “cookie” settings.
  - Limited combination of data for security purposes: Regardless of the user’s settings in Facebook or Instagram, Meta stores and combines usage data for security purposes. However, this is done only temporarily and for no longer than a standardised period of time defined in advance.