# July 2024

- **Google to shelve its plans to depreciate 3p cookies in Chrome** (https://privacysandbox.com/news/privacy-sandbox-update/): Instead of deprecating third-party cookies, Google would introduce a new experience in Chrome that lets people make an informed choice that applies across their web browsing, and they’d be able to adjust that choice at any time. Google is discussing this new path with regulators, and will engage with the industry as it rolls this out. This has been mostly the result of UK regulator pressure. 
 
- **Vinted fined €2.38M for shadow-blocking users**  (https://vdai.lrv.lt/en/news/a-company-operating-an-online-second-hand-clothing-trading-and-exchange-platform-is-fined-under-the-general-data-protection-regulation/):
  - Background: Vinted, UAB (the company) is the operator of the online second-hand clothing trading and exchange platform “Vinted”.
  - Findings:
    - The company, in its response to the applicants’ requests, indicated that it would not act on a specific request for deletion of data, because the applicant concerned did not identify in their request the ‘specific grounds’ under Article 17 of the GDPR, i.e. they did not identify a specific reason corresponding to Article 17(1) of the GDPR.
    - The company, in order to ensure the security of the platform and its users, unlawfully applied ‘shadow blocking’ (the processing of personal data with the intention that a person who allegedly violates the “Vinted” platform’s principles of operation should leave the platform without being aware of such processing of their personal data) in respect of some of the applicants, in violation of the principles of fairness and transparency.
    - The company did not take sufficient technical and organisational measures to ensure the implementation of the principle of accountability and to be able to demonstrate that it had taken (or reasonably refused to take) action with regard to right of access.
  - Result: administrative fine of EUR 2 385 276.
  
- **FTC wants to fine NGL Labs $5M for Deceptive Claims Around AI Content** (https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2024/07/ftc-order-will-ban-ngl-labs-its-founders-offering-anonymous-messaging-apps-kids-under-18-halt, https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/NGL-Complaint.pdf):
  - Background: Defendants develop and operate a social media app (“NGL App”) that
    can be installed on Apple and Android devices. The NGL App purports to allow
    consumers to receive anonymous messages from their friends and social media
    contacts. The NGL App purports to allow consumers to receive anonymous
    messages from their friends and social media contacts. Defendants have described
    the NGL App as a “fresh take on anonymity” that provides a “safe space for
    teens.”
  - Findings:
    - FTC and Los Angeles DA’s Office allege that NGL and its co-founders not only actively marketed their service to children and teens, but that they also **falsely claimed that its AI content moderation program filtered out cyberbullying** and other harmful messages.
    - In addition, the complaint alleges that the defendants sent **fake messages that appeared to come from real people and tricked users into signing up for their paid subscription** by falsely promising that doing so would reveal the identity of the senders of messages.
      - When a consumer posted a prompt inviting anonymous messages, they would receive computer-generated fake messages such as “are you straight?” or “I know what you did.” NGL used fake, computer-generated messages like these or others—such as messages regarding stalking—in an effort to trick consumers into believing that their friends and social media contacts were engaging with them through the NGL App.
      - When a user would receive a reply to a prompt—whether it was from a real consumer or a fake message—consumers saw advertising encouraging them to buy the NGL Pro service to find out the identity of the sender. The complaint alleges, however, that consumers who signed up for the service, which cost as much as $9.99 a week, did not receive the name of the sender. Instead, paying users only received useless “hints” such as the time the message was sent, whether the sender had an Android or iPhone device, and the sender’s general location. NGL’s bait-and-switch tactic prompted many consumers to complain, which NGL executives laughed off, dismissing such users as “suckers.”
  - Result:
    - USD 5M fine;
    - Obligation to implement a neutral age gate that prevents new and current users from accessing the app if they indicate that they are under 18;
    - Prohibited from making misrepresentations about the sender of messages on any app and making similar false claims as outlined in the complaint;
    - Prohibited from making misrepresentations about the capabilities of any artificial intelligence technology, and its ability to filter out cyberbullying;
    - Prohibited from making misrepresentations related to negative options and required to disclose all details related to recurring charges; and
    - Required to obtain express informed consent from consumers prior to billing them for a negative option subscription, provide a simple mechanism for cancelling any negative option subscriptions, and to send reminders to consumers about negative option charges.

- **TikTok fined £1.875 million for inaccurate response to UK's Ofcom on matter of parental controls** (https://www.ofcom.org.uk/online-safety/protecting-children/tiktok-fined-1.875m-for-providing-inaccurate-data-on-safety-controls?utm_source=linkedin&utm_medium=social-media&utm_campaign=onlinesafety24&utm_content=tiktokfine, https://www.ofcom.org.uk/siteassets/resources/documents/about-ofcom/bulletins/enforcement-bulletin/tiktok-investigation/final-decision.pdf?v=370824): Ofcom asked TikTok to provide data on take-up of its parental controls feature, “Family Pairing”. TikTok responded to our information request on 4 September 2023. On 1 December 2023, TikTok highlighted that the data it had provided was not accurate and that it was conducting an internal investigation to understand the root cause of its inaccuracies. Despite being aware that we intended to include its parental controls data in an imminent transparency report, TikTok did not inform Ofcom about the inaccuracy for more than three weeks after discovering the issue. 

- **Pharmacy fined EUR 600k for cookie violations (in the context of health products)** (https://autoriteitpersoonsgegevens.nl/actueel/boete-van-600000-euro-voor-tracking-cookies-op-kruidvatnl): Kruidvat, AS Watson (Health & Beauty Continental Europe) BV, collected data from website visitors and was able to create personal profiles of these people. In addition to location data of visitors, this included which pages they visited, which products they added to the shopping cart and bought, and which recommendations they clicked on. That is very sensitive information, due to the specific nature of drugstore products. Such as pregnancy tests, contraceptives or medication for all kinds of ailments. Thosesensitive information, linked to the location (which can be traced via the IP address) of the unique visitor, can create a very specific and invasive profile of the people who visit Kruidvat.nl. In the cookie banner on Kruidvat.nl, the boxes to agree to the placement of tracking software were checked by default.
  
- **EDPB opinion on pay-or-consent is making waves** (series of links):
  - https://iabeurope.eu/iab-europe-sends-position-paper-to-the-edpb-on-the-consent-or-pay-model/
  - https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_24_3862
  - https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_24_3582


