# Week 1 - 7 May 2023

- **Sharing of pseudonymous data to a third party does not constitute data sharing if the recipient has no way of reidentification** (https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:62020TJ0557): Shareholder and creditors of Banco Popular Español, SA complained to EDPS that the bank did not disclose that it shared their data with Deloitte and Banco Santander. EDPS decided that SRB had, in fact, infringed upon the data subject's rights by not disclosing transfers to Deloitte of pseudonymous data. Now, the General Court annulled the decision of EDPS on the grounds that it only examined SRB's ability to reconstruct the data after preudonymization. Instead, the court argues, to comply with the CJEU ruling in Breyer, the EDPS should have put oneself in Deloitte’s position in order to determine whether the information transmitted to it relates to ‘identifiable persons’. It ought to have reviewed if Deloitte had means likely reasonably to be used to reidentify people. 

- **CJEU partically confirms AG's limited view on compensation for GDPR breaches** (https://curia.europa.eu/jcms/upload/docs/application/pdf/2023-05/cp230072en.pdf): A while ago NOYB trashed the AG's opinion on compensation of non-material damages (https://noyb.eu/en/analysis-no-non-material-damages-gdpr). The CJEU states that compensation follows only from combination of GDPR violation, damages and causal link between the two. As a result, a GDPR infringement itself is not enough for a compensation. At the same time, the CJEU rejected the de minimis idea of the AG, stating that there is no threshold to be crossed in terms of seriousness of damage. Finally, the CJEU states that each Member State has to devise its own sstem of assessing damages.

- **CJEU: A summary table is not a sufficient response to a data access request** (https://curia.europa.eu/jcms/upload/docs/application/pdf/2023-05/cp230071en.pdf, https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=273286&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=4240374): The decision seems to be very much in line with the views of the AG expressed earlier: a summary table of data processed is not enough, extracts from documents or even entire documents need to be provided. This can undermine some business models where internal confidentiality of data is a competitive advantage.

- **CJEU's AG: balancing test necessary to assess appropriateness of data security** (https://curia.europa.eu/jcms/upload/docs/application/pdf/2023-04/cp230067en.pdf): The Bulgarian tax authorities were hacked and a natural person requested compensation of non-material damages as a result. The AG expressed the following views: (1) a leak itself does not mean that Art. 32 was breached. Instead, a balancing test must be struck to determine whether the controller has undertaken adequate measures in light of interest of data subjects and the costs of implementation; (2) the controller bears the burder of proving that the measures were adequate, while the person bears the burden of proving emotional damage and not simply trouble and inconvenience; (4) that a leak is not a strict liability violation and the controller can present proof showing it is not in any way responsible for the event giving rise to the damage, thereby avoiding liability.

- **CJEU's AG on the notion of (joint) controller, processing and strict liability** (https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=273310&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=3438185): The background of the case is that a COVID tracking app was initially developed by ITSS at the initiative of NVSC (a public authority). The privacy notices referred to NVSC. However, NVSC never ended up acquiring the rights to the app from the developer company. As a result, the question arose who should be regarded as the controller. The AG says that a controller is only someone who factually determines the means of processing and who actually consented to the release of the mobile application to the public. The AG also stated that a lack of a formal agreement does not preclude the qualification of relationship as a joint controllership. Joint controllership arises out of situation where processing would not be possible without the participation of both parties because both have a tangible impact on the determination of the purposes and means of that processing, not mere coordination. The AG also stated that running a test phase of the app counts as "processing" (duh). Finally, and probably most importantly, the AG stated that in his view, liability for GDPR infringement can only take place if it occured ‘intentionally or negligently’.

- **FTC intends to block Meta from monetizing children's data and releasing new features** (https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2023/05/ftc-proposes-blanket-prohibition-preventing-facebook-monetizing-youth-data, https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/C4365-Commission-Order-to-Show-Cause-%28Redacted-Public%29.pdf): The FTC proposes changes to its 2020 order against Facebook. Under the changes, Meta would be prohibited from profiting from data it collects, including through its virtual reality products, from users under the age of 18. It would also be subject to other expanded limitations, including in its use of facial recognition technology, and required to provide additional protections for users. The order is heavily redacted, but the words "gaps" and "weaknesses" comes up a lot. The proposed changes include: (1) strict limitations on Meta's ability to use information it collects from children and teens; (2) pause on new products and features until Meta can prove through written confirmation from the qualified, independent third-party assessor – that its privacy program fully complies with the Order and has no material gaps or weaknesses.

- **Washington's My Health My Data Act will come into effect in 2024** (https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2023-24/Pdf/Bills/House%20Passed%20Legislature/1155-S.PL.pdf): In parallel to various state's efforts to sign into law consimer privacy laws, Washington is a step ahead and enacted a law that protects health-related data which was previously unprotected by HIPAA due to the latter's scope of application to "covered entities" only. I find it likely that similar laws will be enacted in other states, not least because of overturning of Roe v. Wade and consequent risks to people due to sharing of information about their reproductive choices. The law will come into effect in March 2024. 