# Week 8 - 14 May 2023

- **A nominal DPIA in case of processing of biometric data costs EUR 200k** (https://www.aepd.es/es/documento/reposicion-ps-00553-2021.pdf): The GSMA organizer of the Mobile World Congress ('MWC') in Barcelona required all participants, even virtual ones, to submit a scan of their passport. The DPA concluded that the DPIA prepared was "was merely nominal, since it has not examined its substantive aspects, nor assessed the risks nor the proportionality and necessity of the implementation of the system, its affectation to the rights and freedoms of the interested parties and their guarantees”. Interesting that the DPA did not substantiate how it came to the conclusion that the DPIA was "nominal". 

- **EU Parlaiment votes against US adequacy** (https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-room/20230505IPR85012/meps-against-greenlighting-personal-data-transfers-with-the-u-s): The European Parliament (EP) has adopted a resolution calling on the European Commission (EC) not to grant the United States an adequacy decision on personal data transfers based on the EU-U.S. Data Privacy Framework (DPF). The EP argues that the DPF is an improvement on previous frameworks, but does not provide for sufficient safeguards. Among others, the EP is concerned about the following: (1) it still allows for bulk collection of personal data in certain cases; (2) it does not make bulk data collection subject to independent prior authorization; (3) it creates a Data Protection Review Court (DPRC) aimed at providing redress to EU data subjects, but its decisions would be secret; and (4) DPRC judges could be dismissed by the U.S. President, who could also overrule its decisions. The EP urges the EC to continue negotiations with the U.S. to improve the DPF. Note that EP resolutions do not have a direct barring effect against the DPF, and shall be considered by the Commission.

- **EU Parlaiment's Internal Market and Civil Liberties committees approved AI Act draft** (https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-room/20230505IPR84904/ai-act-a-step-closer-to-the-first-rules-on-artificial-intelligence, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/meetdocs/2014_2019/plmrep/COMMITTEES/CJ40/DV/2023/05-11/ConsolidatedCA_IMCOLIBE_AI_ACT_EN.pdf): Before negotiations with the Council on the final form of the law can begin, this draft negotiating mandate needs to be endorsed by the whole Parliament, with the vote expected during the 12-15 June session. Summary of provisions:
  - Prohibited AI practices: The rules prohibit a number of AI practices that are considered to be high-risk, such as:
    - Social scoring
    - Real-time biometric identification in public spaces
    - Biometric categorisation systems using sensitive characteristics
    - Predictive policing systems
    - Emotion recognition systems in law enforcement, border management, workplace, and educational institutions
    - Indiscriminate scraping of biometric data from social media or CCTV footage to create facial recognition databases
  - High-risk AI: The rules define high-risk AI as AI systems that pose a significant risk to people's safety, health, fundamental rights, or the environment. High-risk AI systems will be subject to a number of requirements, such as:
    - Conformity assessment
    - Market surveillance
    - Data protection impact assessments
    - Public scrutiny
  - General-purpose AI: The rules also establish requirements for general-purpose AI, which is AI that can be used for a variety of purposes. General-purpose AI systems will be required to comply with certain transparency requirements, such as disclosing that the content was generated by AI and designing the model to prevent it from generating illegal content.
  - Supporting innovation: The rules include a number of provisions to support AI innovation, such as:
    - Exemptions for research activities and AI components provided under open-source licenses
    - Regulatory sandboxes
    - Strengthened enforcement

- **An analysis of Washington's My Health My Data Act** (https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2023-24/Pdf/Bills/House%20Passed%20Legislature/1155-S.PL.pdf, https://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=0d594909-4629-4b60-8ba2-23465bd65c2f): 
  - *Scope*: 
    - Regulated entities: The law applies to “regulated entities”, which is any entity that (1) conducts business in Washington, or produces or provides products or services targeted to consumers in Washington, and (2) alone, or jointly with others, determines the purpose and meanings of collecting, processing, sharing, or selling of consumer health data. “Small businesses” are a subset of regulated entities and the only difference in the Act is that for some provisions.
    - Consumers: (1) a natural person who is a Washington resident; or (2) a natural person whose consumer health data is collected in Washington. The definition excludes employees and B2B data.
    - CHD or consumer health data: means personal information that is linked or reasonably linkable to a consumer and that identifies the consumer's past, present, or future physical or mental health status. Specifically:
      - Individual health conditions, treatment, diseases, or diagnoses;
      - Social, psychological, behavioral, and medical interventions;
      - Health-related surgeries or procedures;
      - Use or purchase of prescribed medication;
      - Bodily functions, vital signs, symptoms, or measurements of the information expressly identified in the definition of CHD;
      - Diagnoses or diagnostic testing, treatment, or medication;
      - Gender-affirming care information;
      - Reproductive or sexual health information;
      - Biometric data;
      - Genetic data;
      - Precise location information that could reasonably indicate a consumer’s attempt to acquire or receive health services or supplies;
      - Data that identifies a consumer seeking “health care services,” which is defined broadly as any service provided to a person to assess, measure, improve, or learn about a person’s mental or physical health; and
      - Any information that a regulated entity, or its respective processor, processes to associate or identify a consumer with the data described above that is derived or extrapolated from non-health information (such as proxy, derivative, inferred, or emergent data by any means, including algorithms or machine learning)
  - *Privacy Notice*: must post a “Consumer Health Data Privacy Policy” and post a “prominent” link on the regulated entity’s homepage.
  - *Consent*: There are two levels of consent under the act - typical GDPR-style consent and an "authorization" which is much more formal in its content. Consent is required for any processing that goes beyond what is necessary to provide a consumer-requested product or service. A separate consent is required for sharing CHD. An authorization is required for disclosure that amounts to sale of CHD (exchange of consumer health data for monetary or other valuable consideration).
  - *Consumer Rights*:
    - Right to access;
    - Right to delete which extends beyond just the addressee of the deletion request to downstream recipients as well. The deletion requirement also applies to data archives and backups, though there is a 6 month deadline to complete.
    - Right to withdraw consent;
    - Right to non-discrimination;
    - Right to appeal a regulated entity’s refusal to take action on a request.
  - *Ban on geo-fencing*: it is prohibited to implement a geofence around an entity that provides in-person health care services where such geofencing results in collection of health data or sending messages to consumers relating to health.