# September 16-30

- **Irish DPA fined Meta EUR 91M** (https://www.dataprotection.ie/en/news-media/press-releases/DPC-announces-91-million-fine-of-Meta): This inquiry was launched in April 2019, after Meta Platforms Ireland Limited (MPIL) notified the DPC that it had inadvertently stored certain passwords of social media users in ‘plaintext’ on its internal systems (i.e. without cryptographic protection or encryption). Interestingly, the fine is not triggered by a data breach, but just as a consequence of low security practices.

- **Germany's DSK clarifies matter of data transfers in course of M&A activity** (https://www.datenschutzkonferenz-online.de/media/dskb/2024-09-11_Beschluss%20DSK_%20Asset_Deals.pdf):
  - Customer Data. 
    - 1/ **Contract initiation**. A transfer is only permitted if a review by the seller shows that the seller's own legitimate interests in the transfer are not opposed by any overriding interests of the customer. The legitimate interests of the customer can usually be taken into account by an objection solution. The customers are notified of the data transfer to the buyer with an appropriate period of notice (around 6 weeks) for a possible objection.
    - 2/ **Ongoing contractual relationships**. In case of asset deals, it should be taken into account that customers will continue having e.g. warranty claims towards the original seller. Should a share deal be undertaken, the processing as a debtor and creditor is based on performance of contract. If an assumption of performance is agreed between the purchaser and the seller, it must be examined whether a transfer of the customer's data from the seller to the purchaser would conflict with the overriding interests of the customer within the meaning of Art. 6 Paragraph 1 Subparagraph 1 Letter f of GDPR. This is generally not the case with regard to the data required for performance, because the customer is primarily interested in performance and this can usually be better guaranteed by the purchaser than by the seller. However, if the interests in not transferring the data outweigh the interests of the customer in individual cases, effective consent from the customer concerned is required.
    - 3/ **Terminated contractual relationship**. If the seller intends to transfer data of former customers without ongoing contracts (legacy data) to the buyer in order to comply with the statutory retention periods, the conclusion of a contract for order processing in accordance with Art. 28 Para. 3 GDPR is required. This data may be transmitted, but may only be used for the purposes of statutory retention periods. The purchaser must separate this data from the data of customers with an ongoing contractual relationship (“two-cabinet solution”).
    - 4/ **Advertising by the purchaser.** To the extent that the purchaser is permitted to process the customer's contact data in accordance with the criteria set out in 2.1 and 2.2, these can generally be used for advertising purposes in accordance with Art. 6, Paragraph 1, Subparagraph 1, Letter f of GDPR to the extent that this would have been permitted by the seller.
    - 5/ **Special categories of customer data**, such as health data, can only be transferred from the seller to the buyer by means of informed and explicit consent in accordance with Art. 9 (2) (a), Art. 7 GDPR.
    - 6/ **Bank details**. The bank details (IBAN) can be transmitted to the purchaser via contract performance, provided these relate to an existing contractual relationship; otherwise, consent is needed. 
  - Supplier data. When it comes to business contact details, there are usually no overriding interests that would conflict with the transmission. Suppliers may even generally have an interest in continuing an existing business relationship with a new buyer
  - Employee data. 
    - In the context of an "asset deal", the transmission of employee data from the seller to the buyer can generally rely on contract performance.
    - If a company participates in merger & acquisition activity as seller, matters of personal data transfers arise. In due diligence phase, the DSK confirms that legitimate interest is available with respect to particularly prominent persons. 
    - However, there may also be special cases in which data transfer from the seller to the buyer will not be permitted or will not be permitted in full, including:
      - At the time of mere contract negotiations between sellers and potential buyers - the transmission of employee data is generally not permitted. In individual cases, transmission may only be permitted with the effective consent of the employees.
      - Employees who are affected by a transfer of a business must be informed of this in writing. After receiving this information, the affected employees have one month to object to the transfer of their employment relationship to the buyer.
  - Misc
    - Other obligations
      - Seller is responsible for ensuring legal basis for sending data. Purchaser is controller upon receiving data.
      - Purchaser must inform the customers in accordance with Art. 14 GDPR within a reasonable period of time, but no later than one month after receiving the data records.
    - Transfer of customer db as the only asset
      - Transmission as part of a sale of customer data as a separate "asset" (sale of customer databases) is generally only possible with the prior consent of the customers concerned. 
      - Only if micro-enterprises (fewer than 10 employees) or small enterprises (fewer than 50 employees and an annual turnover of no more than EUR 10 million) transfer the data of their customers to a micro-enterprise or small enterprise in the same economic sector due to the termination of their own economic activity , the one-time transmission of only the postal addresses can be implemented by way of an opt-out solution. The affected customers will be informed by the seller about the transfer of their postal addresses and will be informed that they can informally object to the seller within a reasonable period of time (usually 4 - 6 weeks). In the absence of an objection, the transmission of postal addresses as the only asset can exceptionally be based on legitimate interest.

- **CJEU confirmed DPA is not obliged to issue fines** (https://curia.europa.eu/jcms/upload/docs/application/pdf/2024-09/cp240149en.pdf, https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=290402&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=1650244):
  - Background: 
  	- The savings bank is a communal institution governed by public law, whose tasks include the settlement of banking and credit transactions. On 15 November 2019, it notified the HBDI, in accordance with Article 33 of the GDPR, of a personal data breach consisting of the fact that one of its employees had, on several occasions, unlawfully accessed personal data of TR, one of its customers. The savings bank failed to notify TR (the claimant) of the breach of his personal data.
  	- Following the complaint lodged by TR, the HBDI heard the savings bank in writing and orally on the criticisms made against it. During the hearing, the savings bank stated that it had refrained from making a communication under Article 34 of the GDPR because its data protection officer had taken the view that there was no high risk to TR’s rights and freedoms. Disciplinary measures had been taken against the employee concerned and she had confirmed in writing that she had neither copied nor retained the personal data, that she had not transferred them to third parties and that she would not do so in the future. Furthermore, since the HBDI criticised the excessively short period during which access logs were retained, the savings bank informed it that that question would be reviewed.
  	- By decision of 3 September 2020, the HBDI informed TR that the savings bank had not infringed Article 34 of the GDPR, since the savings bank’s assessment that the personal data breach committed was unlikely to result in a high risk to his rights and freedoms, within the meaning of that article, was not manifestly incorrect.
  	- TR lodged an action against that decision before the Verwaltungsgericht Wiesbaden (Administrative Court, Wiesbaden, Germany), the referring court, asking it to order the HBDI to take action against the savings bank.
  - Judgement:
  	- GDPR must be interpreted as meaning that when a breach of personal data has been established, the supervisory authority is not required to exercise a corrective power, in particular the power to impose an administrative fine.

- **UK Report on Cookie Management Design** (https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/660d15f338f66c001184a95d/BIT_Evaluating_browser-based_cookie_settings_report.pdf): Between August and December 2023, BIT designed, built, and tested an online experiment with 5,019 UK adults (18+). Takeaways:
  - 1/ Most people accept and use cookies. Even in the experiment treatment group where the default was to decline cookies, 58% people decided to accept (80% was the highest acceptance rate across all the tests). 
  - 2/ Not many people decline cookies. Only 39% declined cookies where that was the default setting was to decline cookies (17% was the lowest rejection rate across all the tests). 
  - 3/ Many people (42%) may want to customise their cookie settings. Current cookie setting management systems make this difficult. With better design, we can help people achieve their privacy goals. 
  - 4/ The design features of cookie settings appear to affect the choices people make.

- **Berlin enforcement in 2023** (https://www.datenschutz-berlin.de/pressemitteilung/veroeffentlichung-des-jahresberichts-2023/): 
  - In 2023, the Data Protection Commissioner imposed fines totaling 549,410 euros on private bodies in the state of Berlin. The annual report provides information on three key cases:
    - 1/ Fine against a bank for lack of transparency: A bank in Berlin was fined 300,000 euros for failing to comply with its transparency obligations in connection with an **automated individual decision**. The company had refused to provide a customer with comprehensible information about the reasons for the automated rejection of a credit card application.
    - 2/ Fine for collecting particularly sensitive data: A company in the cultural sector was fined 215,000 euros. It had improperly **documented information about the health of employees** and their interest in establishing a works council. The information was intended to be used to prepare dismissals of employees who were on probation.
    - 3/ Fine for covert **video surveillance in the workplace**: In another case, a company had monitored three interns at their workplace using video cameras hidden in electrical sockets without the people concerned knowing about it. The company was fined 4,000 euros because the video surveillance was unnecessary and disproportionate.
  - At the European level, the BlnBDI played a key role in a fine decision by the Irish data protection authority against the company TikTok Technology Limited (TikTok) last year. The company was fined 345 million euros for violating the rights of minors. Among other things, TikTok had made content from underage users available to the public by default and had not provided sufficient information about this. Together with other German data protection authorities, the BlnBDI managed to get the Irish data protection authority to extend its decision to include a further violation in the European Data Protection Board: so-called **dark patterns** - misleading designs in the app - prevented underage users from making data protection-friendly settings.

- **CNIL Guide for App Ecosystem** (https://www.cnil.fr/sites/cnil/files/2024-09/recommandation-applications-mobiles.pdf):
  - CNIL published a guide focused on apps. It deals with stakeholders in the ecosystem (developers, publishers, app stores, OS providers, SDK providers etc.), GDPR applicability, explains their roles in terms of processing.
  - Among others, the guide 
    - reinforces the obligation to collect consent for app-specific identifiers such as mobile ids;
    - contextualises OS permissions in GDPR through concepts such as data minimisation;
    - encourages local (on-device) processing by excluding it from GDPR applicability scope.

- **EUR 30k fine for data access failures** (https://www.dpa.gr/el/enimerwtiko/prakseisArxis/epiboli-prostimoy-kai-entoli-symmorfosis-sto-ekab-gia-parabasi-toy): 
  - 20k fine for lack of response on data access request;
  - 10k fine for lack of transparency in failing to inform data subject about change of privacy notice.