# Week 06 - 12 February 2023

- **German Data Protection Conference issues decision on third country access to personal data** (https://www.datenschutzkonferenz-online.de/media/dskb/20230206_DSK_Beschluss_Extraterritoriale_Zugriffe.pdf): The German DSK clarified its stance on reliance on EU subsidiaries of non-EEA corporations. The risk of access alone does not trigger Chapter V requirements. If norms or practice of access exists, special attention to due diligence of the reliability of the vendor should be paid. It is not entirely clear if the DSK considers that US has practice of access and if any sufficient guarantees other than full encryption exist.

English translation of the original:
<details><summary><b>Resolution of the Conference of the Independent Data Protection Authorities of the Federation and the Länder of January 31, 2023</b></summary>

The Conference of Independent Data Protection Authorities of the Federation and the Länder assesses access possibilities of public bodies of third countries to personal data processed on behalf in the EEA pursuant to Art. 28 GDPR from a data protection perspective as follows: 

(1) The risk alone that - for example via rights to issue instructions under company law - the third-country parent company of an EEA company could instruct it, or that public bodies of third countries could directly instruct EEA companies to transfer personal data to a third country, is not sufficient to assume a transfer to a third country within the meaning of Art. 44 et seq. H

(2) However, such a risk may result in processors subject to such laws lacking reliability within the meaning of Art. 28(1) GDPR, unless they - or the controller - have taken technical and/or organizational measures that provide sufficient guarantees that the processor will comply with its obligations, in particular as regards refraining from processing personal data without or against the controller's instructions, especially on the basis of obligations under third-country law.

(3) To the extent that there is a risk that a standard or practice that may require processing of personal data that is unlawful under EU law may also apply to EEA subsidiaries of third country entities, processing by an EEA subsidiary as a processor is not in itself sufficient to achieve reliability within the meaning of Article 28(1) of the GDPR.

(4) Insofar as a norm or practice of a third country creates the abstract risk of a transfer of personal data from the EEA to a third country by an entity in the EEA acting as a processor - e.g., the EEA subsidiary of a third country company - which is impermissible under EU law, particularly high requirements must be placed on the due diligence of the reliability check within the meaning of Art. 28(1) GDPR, which take this risk into account. This first requires an assessment of all circumstances of the individual case as to whether the processor and/or the data it processes fall under this third-country standard or practice and, if so, whether the processor nevertheless provides sufficient guarantees that no processing occurs that is impermissible under the standards of the GDPR or the applicable Member State law. In particular, the following points must be taken into account: 

- the result of an assessment regarding extraterritorial applicability of the third country law and, if applicable, practical extraterritorial application beyond that, 
- in the case of extraterritorial applicability and/or application: the result of an assessment as to whether the law or practice of the third country could affect the obligations under the processing contract (following the recommendations 01/2020 of the European Data Protection Board),
- the risk that the third country parent of an EEA subsidiary could instruct it to transfer personal data to a third country transfer (review of findings on the legal situation/practice), 
- whether the order processing contract allows unlawful processing based on third country law according to European standards, 
- any assurances from the third country parent company and the EEA company on how to deal with conflicting requirements of third country and EU law; and of a third country and the EU, 
- an assessment of the legal situation and practice of the third country as to whether such assurances can actually be complied with 
- an assessment of all other aspects of whether such assurances are actually being are actually complied with, 
- any data protection breaches identified in the past, 
- the severity and likelihood of sanctions for violations under EU law and the law of the third country, and 
- the exclusion of unauthorized transfers through appropriate technical and organizational measures.

If, after this assessment, the processor does not provide sufficient guarantees, the risks of data processing in breach of European law must be offset by technical and/or organizational measures that compensate for precisely those deficiencies in the legal situation or practice of third-country law that led to the processor's lack of reliability. For the question of what standards should be applied to these measures, data controllers can refer to Recommendations 01/2020 of the European Data Protection Board, although it should be noted that these recommendations were designed for the context of data transfers to third countries,6 so that divergent assessments of the suitability of certain measures are not excluded. Insofar as processing of personal data on behalf requires access by the processor to clear data, it must be examined particularly critically, in corresponding application of use case 6 of Annex 2 of Recommendations 01/2020, how the requirements of Article 28 (1) of the GDPR can be sufficiently taken into account.7 

(5) The controller must be able to demonstrate that a processor meets the requirements of Article 28(1) and Recital 81 of the GDPR in terms of expertise, reliability and resources.

Based on this decision, the Commission will advocate for further discussion of this issue in the European Data Protection Board (EDSA).

</details>

- **DPO dismissal is subject to labour law rules; conflict of interest to be understood in everyday language meaning** (https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=270323&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=3046073):The CJEU found that member states are free to to lay down more protective specific provisions on the dismissal of the DPO, this being in their retained competence and not undermining the aim of the protection provided by the GDPR - if these provisions are compatible with EU law. The controller or processor must ensure other tasks and duties don't cause a "conflict of interests.", as normally understood in everyday language. A DPO cannot determine the objectives and methods of processing personal data for the controller or its processor. Conflict of interest is determined case by case, considering relevant circumstances, organizational structure, and applicable rules, including any policies.