# Week 13 - 19 February 2023

- **ICO's set of tools to protect children's privacy in gaming** (https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/childrens-code-hub/top-tips-for-games-designers-how-to-comply-with-the-children-s-code/): The ICO has published a set of tools & guidelines for gaming which may actually be useful outside of this industry. For example, it contains guidelines on levels of age verification depending on risk (https://ico.org.uk/media/about-the-ico/documents/4018659/age-assurance-opinion-202110.pdf), privacy by design (https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/childrens-code-hub/childrens-code-design-guidance/), DPIA (https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/childrens-code-hub/sample-data-protection-impact-assessment-mobile-gaming-app/) etc. Can be quite useful to update your inhouse assessments.

- **CJEU AG's opinion on data access: includes generated data, no right to extracts & metadata** (https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=268626&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=5401958): The CJEU AG has provided his opinion on case C-487/21 on the scope of data access requests which is currently in CJEU's docket. The case concerns an access request to a consulting company calculating the creditworthiness of third parties. The company provided an excel sheet with name, date of birth, street, postal code, and place. No other data, including emails & database extracts were provided. The questions referred to the CJEU are: (1) does the term "copy" refer to just a representation/summary of content of the data storages, or should further context be provided and data extracts should be provided; (2) whether only data undergoind processing shall be provided or also, for example, the metadata? For question 1, the AG believes that the term "copy" refers to a faithful reproduction in intelligible form of the personal data, without data omissions and including any generated data, "in order to be able to verify their accuracy and to enable him or her to satisfy himself or herself as to the fairness and lawfulness of the processing so as to be able, where appropriate, to exercise further rights". However, Art. 15 does not confer the right to receive extracts from documents and/or databases, as long as the objective of Art. 15 is achieved. As to question 2, the AG decided not to include metadata and other data outside of the scope of the ‘copy of personal data undergoing processing’.

- **Austrian DPA rules against LI in employee email monitoring** (https://www.dsb.gv.at/newsletter/dsb-newsletter-1-2023.html): The company checked technical logs for 6,000 employees for a specific recipient domain, based on suspicion of a violation of the trade secret. The DPA ruled against LI for the following reasons: "The data protection authority came to the conclusion that the control measure, which took place only six months after the incident occurred, was not proportionate due to the lack of a temporal connection and the topicality. As part of the balancing of interests, it was also necessary to take into account as a factor that, in the opinion of the data protection authority, there was no valid approval from the works council". 

- **£200,000 fine for 1,7M spam calls** (https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/media-centre/news-and-blogs/2023/02/business-fined-200-000-for-making-over-17million-unlawful-calls/): The UK company made 1,7M calls trying to decieve people into buying their insurance services. ICO’s investigation also found evidence to suggest that It’s OK Ltd were potentially targeting elderly individuals. Surprisingly extremely mild punishment.