# January 2024

- **CNIL fined AMAZON FRANCE €32 million for employee processing violations** (https://cnil.fr/en/employee-monitoring-cnil-fined-amazon-france-logistique-eu32-million): This decision is quite similar to the German decision against H&M for privacy violations with respect to employees. Each warehouse employee is given a scanner to document the performance of certain tasks assigned to them in real time. Each scan carried out by employees results in recording of data, which is stored and used to calculate indicators providing information on the quality, productivity and periods of inactivity of each employee. CNIL ruled that (1) it was illegal to set up a system measuring work interruptions with such accuracy; and (2) it is excessive to keep all the data collected by the system, as well as the resulting statistical indicators for a period of 31 days.

- **Austrian DPA lists criteria for "pay or okay" cookie consent** (https://www.dsb.gv.at/download-links/FAQ-zum-Thema-Cookies-und-Datenschutz.html): In the opinion of the data protection authority, the following points must be observed when using „ pay or okay “: (1) full compliance with all data protection regulations for data processing that takes place on the basis of consent („ okay “); (2) The requirements for the granularity of consent must nevertheless be taken into account; (3) the controller is not a public body; (3) no exclusivity in relation to the content or services offered, ie. companies offering public services; (4) no monopoly or quasi-monopoly of the company on the market; (5) an appropriate and fair price for the payment alternative („ pay “), ie. the payment alternative must not pro forma be offered at a completely unrealistically high price; (6) If a user gains access to the website using the payment alternative, no personal data may be processed for advertising purposes.

- **FTC charges X-Mode and Outlogic with selling raw location data** (https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2024/01/ftc-order-prohibits-data-broker-x-mode-social-outlogic-selling-sensitive-location-data, https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/X-Mode-Complaint.pdf): 
  - Background:
    - X-Mode licenses to third parties raw location data tied to unique persistent identifiers. These third parties can then analyze and use the data for their own purposes, such as advertising or brand analytics, or provide access to the information for their own customers. 
    - Such raw location data includes a unique persistent identifier for the mobile device called a Mobile Advertiser ID (“MAID”), the latitude, longitude, and a timestamp of the observation. 
    - X-Mode incentivizes app developers to incorporate the X-Mode SDK into their apps by promising the app developers passive revenue for each consumer’s mobile device that allows the SDK to collect their location data.
  - **Sensitive nature of data**: X-Mode’s location data associated with MAIDs could be used to track consumers to sensitive locations, including medical facilities, places of religious worship, places that may be used to infer an LGBTQ+ identification, domestic abuse shelters, and welfare and homeless shelters. X-Mode has created **custom audience segments** that were based on sensitive characteristics of consumers. X-Mode licensed these custom audience segments to a third party for advertising or marketing purposes. Specifically, X-Mode entered into an agreement with a privately held clinical research company to license custom audience segments of consumers who had visited Cardiology, Endocrinology, or Gastroenterology offices and visited a pharmacy or drugstore in the Columbus, Ohio area and consumers that had visited a specialty infusion center.
  - **Identification of people**: By plotting each of these signals on a map, much can be inferred about the mobile device owners. For example, the location of a mobile device at night likely corresponds to the consumer’s home address.
  - **Ignoring Privacy Choices**: Android mobile phone operating system has included a privacy control that permitted users to “Opt out of Ads Personalization.” X-Mode ingested the MAIDs, mobile location data, and flags of consumers who had enabled the “Opt out of Ads Personalization” control on their Android mobile phones, and, in many instances and contrary to these consumers’ privacy choices, provided access to this data to marketers and other customers.
  - **Failure to inform consumers of practices**: Because X-Mode obtains most of its location data from third party apps, the company relies on these third parties to obtain informed consumer consent to collect, use, or sell location data. X-Mode has provided third party app publishers incorporating its SDK with recommended language for consumer disclosures in both apps and privacy policies. Notices provided by X-Mode to third-party app publishers fail to fully inform consumers how their data would be used and that their geolocation data would be provided to government contractors for national security purposes.
  - **Failure to verify third party compliance**: Although X-Mode has tracked the language used by third party apps in consumer notices, X-Mode, in many cases, has not taken corrective actions based on any review of this language. X-Mode could audit the process by which its suppliers obtain consent and cease using location data that was not obtained with appropriate consent. Instead, X-Mode relies primarily on contractual language in supplier agreements requiring its suppliers to obtain appropriate consent from consumers and in data licensing agreements prohibiting misuse of its location data, but such language is insufficient to protect consumers from substantial injury.

- **FTC Order Will Ban InMarket from Selling Precise Consumer Location Data** (https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2024/01/ftc-order-will-ban-inmarket-selling-precise-consumer-location-data, https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/D%26O-InMarketMediaLLC.pdf): 
  - **Background**: InMarket collects location information from a variety of sources, including its own apps and from third-party apps that incorporate its software development kit (SDK). InMarket cross-references consumers’ location histories with advertising-related points of interest to identify consumers who have visited those locations and then sorts consumers, based on their visits to these points of interest, into audience segments to which it can target advertising based on their past behavior. InMarket has maintained nearly 2,000 such audience segment lists that have included such categories as “parents of preschoolers,” “Christian church goers,” and “wealthy and not healthy.” InMarket can display ads based on this information to users of apps that incorporate its SDK and also offers a product that sends ads to consumers based on their location. 
  - **Decision**: 
    - The company failed to tell third party apps that the location data provided through InMarket’s SDK will be combined with other data to create profiles of consumers, according to the complaint. 
    - FTC says InMarket failed to obtain informed consent from users of its own apps, shopping rewards app CheckPoints and shopping list app ListEase. For example, when the company requests to use a consumer’s location data, it states that the data will be used for the app’s function, such as to provide shopping reward points or to remind consumers about items on their shopping list, and fails to inform users that the location data will also be combined with other data obtained about those users and used for targeted advertising.
    - The FTC also says that the company’s policy of retaining geolocation data for five years was unnecessary to carry out the purposes for which it was collected and increased the risk that this sensitive data could be disclosed, misused, and linked back to the consumer, thereby exposing sensitive information about the consumer. 
    - In addition to the ban on selling or licensing precise location data—a first for the FTC—the proposed order also requires InMarket to collect informed consent.
 

- **105k fine in France due to data retention and cookies** (https://www.cnil.fr/en/electronic-payment-cnil-fined-ns-cards-france-eu105000): The company had set a data retention period of ten years, after which user accounts were deactivated, but not deleted. Account data was therefore kept indefinitely. Google Analytics cookies were deposited on users' terminals without their consent. In addition, the company used a reCAPTCHA mechanism, provided by GOOGLE, when creating an account and when connecting to the website and mobile application. This mechanism works by collecting hardware and software information (such as device and application data). While the data collected was transmitted to GOOGLE for analysis, the company did not provide any information to the user and did not obtain their prior consent, either to access the information stored on their equipment or to write information on it. I'm quite surprised that reCAPTCHA cookies require consent, given that their primary function is to prevent fraud, and are a valueable tool in fighting automated actions. 

- **150k fine for incomplete DPIA** (https://www.autoriteitpersoonsgegevens.nl/actueel/boete-voor-creditcardbedrijf-ics-na-ontbrekende-risicoanalyse, https://www.autoriteitpersoonsgegevens.nl/uploads/2024-01/Besluit%20boete%20ICS.pdf): International Card Services B.V. (ICS) were fined EUR 150k for a processing covering 1.5M people involving processing of customer name, address, telephone number, e-mail as well as a photo of the customer for bank ID purposes. The conducted DPIA does not provide a systematic description of the processing. Further is it has not appeared that the necessity and proportionality of the processing has been assessed, in particular the measures that contribute to the protection of the rights of data subjects. In addition, it has not emerged that interested parties, their representatives or the data protection officer are involved in the processing.

- **EUR 175k for data brokerage** (https://www.autoriteprotectiondonnees.be/citoyen/lapd-sanctionne-lentreprise-de-gestion-de-donnees-black-tiger-belgium-pour-manque-de-transparence): The DPA found that Black Tiger Belgium cannot rely on LI for its sale of data since the company indirectly collects and processes personal data on a large scale, for a long period of time (the data is kept for 15 years), and, without the data subjects being informed individually in a clear and proactive manner of the treatments carried out.