# August 2024

- **EU AI Act enters into force** (https://www.europarl.europa.eu/topics/en/article/20230601STO93804/eu-ai-act-first-regulation-on-artificial-intelligence)":
  - The Parliament adopted the Artificial Intelligence Act in March 2024 and the Council followed with its approval in May 2024. It will be fully applicable 24 months after entry into force, but some parts will be applicable sooner:
    - The ban of AI systems posing unacceptable risks will apply six months after the entry into force;
    - Codes of practice will apply nine months after entry into force;
    - Rules on general-purpose AI systems that need to comply with transparency requirements will apply 12 months after the entry into force;
    - High-risk systems will have more time to comply with the requirements as the obligations concerning them will become applicable 36 months after the entry into force.
  - The new rules establish obligations for providers and users depending on the level of risk from artificial intelligence. While many AI systems pose minimal risk, they need to be assessed.
    - Unacceptable risk AI systems are systems considered a threat to people and will be banned.
    - AI systems that negatively affect safety or fundamental rights will be considered high risk. All high-risk AI systems will be assessed before being put on the market and also throughout their lifecycle.
    - Generative AI, like ChatGPT, will not be classified as high-risk, but will have to comply with transparency requirements and EU copyright law:
      - Disclosing that the content was generated by AI
      - Designing the model to prevent it from generating illegal content
      - Publishing summaries of copyrighted data used for training.

- **Dutch AP fines Uber €290 million for transferring driver data to US** (https://autoriteitpersoonsgegevens.nl/actueel/ap-legt-uber-boete-op-van-290-miljoen-euro-om-doorgifte-data-chauffeurs-naar-vs, https://autoriteitpersoonsgegevens.nl/system/files?file=2024-08/Besluit%20boete%20Uber%20doorgifte%20naar%20VS.pdf, [decision translation into English](uber_drivers_dutch_ap.md)): The AP has found that Uber has transferred personal data of European taxi drivers to the United States (US) and that Uber has not sufficiently protected the data. The AP launched an investigation into Uber after more than 170 French drivers filed a complaint with the Ligue des droits de l'Homme (LDH), a French human rights advocacy group. The AP regarded several questions relating to Chapter V, including its compatibility with Art. 3 GDPR application, the question of exceptions etc. Among others, the decision deals a heavy blow to the current ambiguity around what incidental transfers mean (in the sense of exceptions) and how far those can be stretched. 

- **FTC claims TikTok's age gate to be ineffective** (and other COPPA violations) (https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2024/08/ftc-investigation-leads-lawsuit-against-tiktok-bytedance-flagrantly-violating-childrens-privacy-law): 
  - As of 2020, TikTok had a policy of maintaining accounts of children that it knew were under 13 unless the child made an explicit admission of age and other rigid conditions were met, according to the complaint. TikTok human reviewers allegedly spent an average of only five to seven seconds reviewing each account to make their determination of whether the account belonged to a child. 
  - TikTok built back doors into its platform that allowed children to bypass the age gate aimed at screening children under 13. TikTok allegedly allowed children to create accounts without having to provide their age or obtain parental consent to use TikTok by using credentials from third-party services like Google and Instagram. TikTok classified such accounts as “age unknown” accounts, which grew to millions of accounts, according to the complaint.
  - TikTok collected numerous categories of information and far more data than it needed, such as information about children’s activities on the app and multiple types of persistent identifiers, which it used to build profiles on children, while failing to notify parents about the full extent of its data collection and use practices. For example, TikTok shared this personal data with third parties such as Facebook and AppsFlyer to persuade existing Kids Mode users to use the service more after their use had declined or ceased, through a practice TikTok called “retargeting less active users”.

- **Swedish DPA fines two pharmacies EUR 3.27M and EUR 710k for misconfigured Meta pixels** (https://www.imy.se/nyheter/sanktionsavgifter-mot-apoteket-och-apohem-for-overforing-av-personuppgifter-till-meta/): Apoteket and Apohem have used Meta's Meta-pixel analysis tool on their websites to improve their marketing on Facebook and Instagram. The incorrect transfer of personal data has been caused by the companies activating a new sub-function in the Meta pixel. By activating the sub-function, the companies have transferred privacy-sensitive personal data to Meta about a large number of customers. Among other things, the companies have provided information on the purchase of non-prescription drugs for the treatment of, for example, specific health problems, self-tests and treatment of STDs and sex toys. The transfer did not include prescription drugs.