# December 2023

- **CJEU clarifies (1) intent, (2) calculation of fines under GDPR, and (3) joint controllership** (https://curia.europa.eu/jcms/upload/docs/application/pdf/2023-12/cp230184en.pdf, https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=280325&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=lst&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=460727, https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=280324&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=460571): 
  - *Texts*
    - [Case C‑807/21](C-807_21.md)
    - [Case C‑683/21](C-683_21.md)
  - *Intent*
    - A data controller may not have an administrative fine imposed on it for an infringement of the GDPR unless that **infringement was committed wrongfully, that is to say, intentionally or negligently**. 
    - Where the controller is a legal person, it is **not necessary for the infringement to have been committed by its management body**; nor is it necessary for that body to have had knowledge of that infringement.
    - A controller may also have a fine imposed on it in respect of **operations performed by a processor**, to the extent that the controller may be held responsible for such operations.
  - *Calculation*
    - The maximum amount of the fine must be calculated on the basis of a percentage of the **total worldwide annual turnover of the undertaking** concerned, taken as a whole, in the preceding business year. Where the addressee of the fine forms part of a group of companies, that fine must be calculated on the basis of the **group’s turnover**.
  - *JC*
    - With regard to **joint control** by two or more entities, the Court clarifies that such control arises solely from the fact that those entities have **participated in the determination of the purposes** and means of processing. Classification as ‘joint controllers’ **does not require that there be a formal arrangement** between the entities in question. A common decision, or converging decisions, are sufficient.

- **CJEU speaks on matters of fault and compensatory damages to data subject** (https://curia.europa.eu/juris/liste.jsf?language=en&num=C-667/21):
  - *Texts*
    - [Case C‑667/21](C‑667_21.md)
  - *Health data processing*
    - Art. 9 conditions are not replacing, but have to be complied with in addition to legal basis requirements under Art. 6.
    - A medical insurance is not obligated to ensure that its former employee's colleagues do not see their data when its processing such data in its capacity as insurer and not as employer.
  - *Compensation*
    - Compensation to data subject is that - compensation, but not a punitive mechanism.
    - With respect to fault, the burden of proof rests not on the person who has suffered damage, but on the data controller.

- **CJEU says that fear of possible data misuse can qualify as non-material damage** (https://curia.europa.eu/jcms/upload/docs/application/pdf/2023-12/cp230191en.pdf, https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=280623&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=968563):
  - *Texts*
    - [Case C‑340/21](C‑340_21.md)
  - *Basis for fining in case of breach*
    - In the event of unauthorised disclosure of personal data or unauthorised access to those data, **courts cannot infer from this fact alone that the protective measures implemented by the controller were not appropriate**. The courts must assess the appropriateness of those measures in a concrete manner. 
    - It is for the controller to **prove that the protective measures implemented were appropriate**. 
    - To assess the appropriateness of the security measures implemented by the controller under that article, an expert’s report cannot constitute a systematically necessary and sufficient means of proof.
  - *Compensation to data subject*
    - In the event of a personal data breach by a third party, the controller may be exempt from liability, on the basis of Article 82(3) of the GDPR, by proving that there is no causal link between its possible breach of the data protection obligation and the damage suffered by the natural person.
    - Court interpreted Article 82(1) of the GDPR as precluding a national rule or practice which makes compensation for ‘non-material damage’, within the meaning of that provision, subject to the condition that the damage suffered by the data subject has reached a certain degree of seriousness.
    - In the event that the **unauthorised disclosure** of personal data or unauthorised access to those data has been committed by a ‘third party’ (such as cybercriminals), the **controller may be required to compensate the data subjects who have suffered damage**, unless it can prove that it is in no way responsible for that damage. 
    - The **fear** experienced by a data subject **with regard to a possible misuse** of his or her personal data by third parties as a result of an infringement of the GDPR **is capable, in itself, of constituting ‘non-material damage’**.
    - Person concerned by an infringement of the GDPR which had negative consequences for him or her **is required to demonstrate that those consequences constitute non-material damage.
    - Where a person claiming compensation on that basis relies on the fear that his or her personal data will be misused in the future owing to the existence of such an infringement, the national **court seised must verify that that fear can be regarded as well founded**, in the specific circumstances at issue and with regard to the data subject

- **CJEU rules on issues of automated decision making by Schufa** (https://curia.europa.eu/jcms/upload/docs/application/pdf/2023-12/cp230186en.pdf, https://curia.europa.eu/juris/documents.jsf?nat=or&mat=or&pcs=Oor&jur=C%2CT%2CF&num=C-634%252F21&for=&jge=&dates=&language=en&pro=&cit=none%252CC%252CCJ%252CR%252C2008E%252C%252C%252C%252C%252C%252C%252C%252C%252C%252Ctrue%252Cfalse%252Cfalse&oqp=&td=%3BALL&avg=&lgrec=en&page=1&lg=&cid=533820):
  - *Texts*
    - [Case C-634/21](C-634_21.md)
  - Automated decision making
    - Scoring constitutes ‘automated individual decision-making’ within the meaning of that provision, where a third party, to which that probability value is transmitted, draws strongly on that probability value to establish, implement or terminate a contractual relationship with that person.
    - Automated decision making must comply not only with the conditions set out in the latter provision and in Article 22(4) of that regulation, but also with the requirements set out in Articles 5 and 6 of that regulation.

- **EDPB issues an urgent binding against Meta prohibiting it from relying on contract or LI** (https://www.edpb.europa.eu/system/files/2023-12/edpb_urgentbindingdecision_202301_no_metaplatformsireland_en_0.pdf, https://www.edpb.europa.eu/system/files/2023-12/nationalenforcementnotice202311_ie_metaplatformsireland_en_0.pdf): See page 65 for content of the ban. The EDPB considers that the ban should refer to Meta IE’s processing of personal data for behavioural advertising purposes on the basis of Article 6(1)(b) GDPR and Article 6(1)(f) GDPR across the entire EEA.

- **TikTok not to be banned in Montana** (https://storage.courtlistener.com/recap/gov.uscourts.mtd.73544/gov.uscourts.mtd.73544.115.0_2.pdf): Earlier in May 23, Montana signed into law an act prohibiting TikTok and app stores from operating in the state. Now, a District Court issued a preliminary injunction against the act citing potential violations of First Amendment as well as potential violation of state vs. federal distribution of powers.

- **The New York Attorney General settled with NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital for $300,000 for behavioral marketing using health data** (https://ag.ny.gov/press-release/2023/attorney-general-james-secures-300000-newyork-presbyterian-hospital-failing, https://ag.ny.gov/sites/default/files/settlements-agreements/aod-nyp-presbyterianhospital.pdf): The NYP’s website allows visitors to book appointments, search for doctors, learn about NYP services, and research information relating to symptoms and conditions. Third-party companies received a variety of information about NYP’s website visitors. In some cases, those companies received information about the user’s health. Most third-party companies received the user’s IP address and the URL of the webpage that had loaded or the link that was clicked. If a user searched for a doctor by specialist or condition, researched a health condition, or scheduled an appointment, information about the user’s doctor or health condition were in some cases reflected in the URL. For example, if a user conducted a search using the words “spine surgery,” the **URL of the search result page would include “spine-surgery”** and the third party would receive that health information about the user. The company agreed to pay out 300k as well as introduce appropriate policies, undergo audits and instruct 3rd parties to delete collected data.

- **Belgian DPA settles on cookie banner issue** (https://www.autoriteprotectiondonnees.be/publications/transaction-art95-n-161-2023.pdf): The issue was initiated by NOYB. The end design of the cookie banner is a "refuse all" button, whereas the "accept all" isn't bolder; the revocation should be easy. 

- **California reviews initiatives to force browser opt-out signals** (https://cppa.ca.gov/announcements/2023/20231211.html): The California Privacy Protection Agency (CPPA) Board is moving to discuss and, in the future, possibly adopt a regulation forcing websites to respect opt-out signals sent by browsers (currently, the user has to opt-out themselves). Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Montana, Oregon, and Texas also require businesses to honor browser privacy signals as an opt-out of the sale of personal data.

- **FTC proposes updates to COPPA** (https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2023/12/ftc-proposes-strengthening-childrens-privacy-rule-further-limit-companies-ability-monetize-childrens?utm_source=govdelivery): FTC has proposed several changes to the rule, including:
  - Requiring Separate Opt-In For Targeted Advertising.
  - Prohibition against conditioning a child’s participation on collection of personal information.
  - Limits on the support for the internal operations exception.
  - Limits on nudging kids to stay online.
  - Changes related to Ed Tech: The FTC has proposed codifying its current guidance related to the use of education technology to prohibit commercial use of children’s information and implement additional safeguards. 
  - Increasing accountability for Safe Harbor programs: The proposed rule would increase transparency and accountability of COPPA Safe Harbor programs, including by requiring each program to publicly disclose its membership list and report additional information to the Commission.
  - Strengthening data security requirements.
  - Limits on data retention: The FTC also would strengthen the COPPA Rule’s data retention limits by allowing for personal information to be retained only for as long as necessary to fulfill the specific purpose for which it was collected.

- **NIST Guidelines on Differential Privacy published** (https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-226.ipd.pdf): Cool in-depth review of differential privacy and different ways of doing it right and wrong. In my opinion, DP is still quite arcane for most businesses, does not work "out-of-the-box" and, most importantly, cannot reliably handle longitudinal multidimensional data.