# April 2024

- **FTC prohibits an alcohol addiction treatment service from selling data** (https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2024/04/alcohol-addiction-treatment-firm-will-be-banned-disclosing-health-data-advertising-settle-ftc, https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/MonumentOrderFiled.pdf): The Federal Trade Commission has taken action against an alcohol addiction treatment service for allegedly disclosing users’ personal health data to third-party advertising platforms, including Meta and Google. New York-based Monument offers users, depending on membership levels that cost from $14.99 to $249 a month, access to online support groups, community forums, online therapy, and access to physicians who can prescribe medications that assist in treating alcohol addiction. Monument claimed on its website and/or in other communications with consumers that users’ personal information would be “100% confidential” and that the company would not disclose such data to third parties without users’ consent.  Monument used  pixels and APIs to track “standard” and “custom events,” meaning instances in which consumers interacted with Monument’s website. The FTC says that Monument gave the custom events descriptive titles that revealed details about its users such as “Paid: Weekly Therapy” or “Paid: Med Management,” when a user signed up for a service. Monument disclosed this custom events information to advertising platforms along with users’ email addresses, IP addresses, and other identifiers, which enabled third parties to identify the users and associate the custom events with specific individuals, according to the complaint. The FTC proposed order includes: (1) $2.5M fine; (2) Seek deletion of data - Monument must direct all third parties to delete the personal data that was shared with them; (3) Inform Consumers - Monument must inform consumers who have yet to be notified by the company about the disclosure of their health information to third parties for advertising; (4) Implement Mandated Privacy Program.

- **FTC fines Cerebral $7.1M to for improper use of sensitive data for advertising** (https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2024/04/proposed-ftc-order-will-prohibit-telehealth-firm-cerebral-using-or-disclosing-sensitive-data?utm_source=govdelivery, https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/cerebral_joint_stipulation_order_permanent_injunction.pdf): Cerebral provides online mental health and related services on a negative option basis, which means consumers are automatically charged unless they cancel those services. To get consumers to sign up for the company’s services and provide detailed personal data, the company claimed it offered “safe, secure, and discreet” services and that users’ data would be kept confidential, according to the complaint. The complaint charges that Cerebral failed to clearly disclose that it would be sharing consumers’ sensitive data with third parties for advertising and **buried disclaimers about its data sharing practices in dense privacy policies**. The complaint charges that Cerebral provided sensitive information of nearly 3.2 million consumers to third parties such as LinkedIn, Snapchat and TikTok. Cerebral gave third parties personal data about its users including names; medical and prescription histories; home and email addresses; phone numbers; birthdates; demographic information; IP addresses; pharmacy and health insurance information; and other health information, according to the complaint. The proposed order also will:
  - Permanently ban Cerebral from using or disclosing consumers’ personal and health information to third parties for most marketing or advertising purposes, and generally require the company to obtain consumers’ consent before disclosing such information to outside parties;
  - Prohibit the company from misrepresenting its privacy and data security practices;
  - Require the company to implement a comprehensive privacy and data security program that, among other things, addresses the specific problems outlined in the complaint;
  - Require the company to post a notice on its website alerting users to the allegations outlined in the complaint and detail the steps it is required to take under the order;
  - Require the company to implement a data retention schedule and to delete most consumer data not used for treatment, payment, or health care operations unless consumers consent to its retention, and provide consumers with a clear mechanism to request that their data be deleted; and
  - Prohibit the company from misrepresenting any negative option and cancellation policies or practices and also require it to provide consumers with an easy method to cancel services.

- **EDPB opinion on pay or consent** (https://www.edpb.europa.eu/news/news/2024/edpb-consent-or-pay-models-should-offer-real-choice_en, https://www.edpb.europa.eu/system/files/2024-04/edpb_opinion_202408_consentorpay_en.pdf): EDPB considers that, in most cases, it will not be possible for large online platforms to comply with the requirements for valid consent, if they confront users only with a choice between consenting to processing of personal data for behavioural advertising purposes and paying a fee. When developing alternatives, large online platforms should consider providing individuals with an ‘equivalent alternative’ that does not entail the payment of a fee. If controllers do opt to charge a fee for access to the ‘equivalent alternative’, they should give significant consideration to offering an additional alternative. This free alternative should be without behavioural advertising, e.g. with a **form of advertising involving the processing of less or no personal data**. Overall, it appears to me that EDPB has far exceeded it's competence here and is directly mandating product and business decisions (see the Free Alternative Without Behavioural Advertising option).

- **CJEU opines on compensation of damages to data subjects** (https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=284641&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=lst&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=1036423): Even if the provision of the GDPR which has been infringed grants rights to natural persons, such an infringement cannot, in itself, constitute ‘non-material damage’ within the meaning of that regulation. Article 82(1) of the GDPR must be interpreted as meaning that, in order to determine the amount of damages due as compensation for damage based on that provision, it is not necessary:
  - First, to apply mutatis mutandis the criteria for setting the amount of administrative fines laid down in Article 83 of that regulation. This is due to the fact that compensation under the relevant article does not have a punitive function; AND 
  - Second, to take account of the fact that several infringements of that regulation concerning the same processing operation affect the person seeking compensation . The fact that several infringements have been committed by the controller in relation to the same data subject cannot constitute a relevant criterion for the purposes of assessing the compensation to be awarded to that data subject under Article 82. Only the damage actually suffered by that person must be taken into consideration in order to determine the amount of the monetary compensation due by way of compensation.

- **The CJEU AG considers Amazon OTC-medicines sales by pharmacies as not health data (unless the controller uses the data for diagnosis purposes)** (https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=285204&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=847448): 
  - **Background**: ND and DR both operate pharmacies. The appellant in the main proceedings, ND, also holds a mail-order licence and also sells his products, including pharmacy-only medicines, via Amazon Marketplace, an e-business platform whereby sellers may offer goods for sale directly to consumers. DR brought an action for an injunction to prevent ND from marketing pharmacy-only medicines on the Amazon online sales platform. According to DR, such marketing constitutes an unfair commercial act in so far as it has the consequence that ND infringes a legal provision, within the meaning of Paragraph 3a of the Law against unfair competition, namely, inter alia, Article 9 of the GDPR, which requires that the customer’s prior explicit consent be obtained for the processing of his or her data concerning health. 
  - **Are OTC sales health data?**: 
    - I would observe that, at first sight, it cannot be denied that the placing of an order for non-prescription medicines online assumes the processing of data from which certain information concerning health or, at least, certain indicia concerning health may be inferred, in so far as that order entails a link between the purchase of a medicine, a product relating to health par excellence and the identity of the purchaser. 
    - The medicines in question, namely non-prescription medicines, are not as a rule intended for the treatment of a particular state, but may be used more generally to treat everyday diseases that may be encountered by anyone and are not symptomatic of a specific pathology or health status. Furthermore, those medicines are also frequently bought as a preventive measure so that they are available when required, or before leaving the habitual residence, for example. By way of illustration, an order for paracetamol does not allow any inference to be drawn as to the precise state of a person, as that molecule is indicated for the treatment of a variety of pains and fevers and is often among the medicines which people have at home, quite apart from any particular need.
    - I am therefore of the view that the answer to the ... question should be that the data of the customers of a pharmacist which are transmitted when an order is placed on an online sales platform for pharmacy-only but non-prescription medicines do not constitute ‘data concerning health’ within the meaning of Article 4(15) and Article 9 of the GDPR, in so far as only hypothetical or imprecise conclusions as to the health status of the person placing the online order may be drawn, which it is for the referring court to verify.

- **The CJEU AG considers that sensitive data manifestly made public does not automatically allow for its use for targeted marketing** (https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=285201&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=787304): Mr. Maximilian Schrems, a Facebook user and activist, claims to have regularly received advertisements directed at homosexuals and invitations to corresponding events. The Advocate General takes the view that the fact that Mr Schrems has made a statement in full awareness concerning his own sexual orientation during a panel discussion open to the public may constitute an act by which he ‘manifestly made public’ those data within the meaning of the GDPR. He recalls that while data concerning sexual orientation fall into the category of data that enjoy particular protection and the processing of which is prohibited, that prohibition does not apply when the data are manifestly made public by the data subject. Nevertheless, this position does not in itself permit the processing of those data for the purposes of personalised advertising.